In this video, we introduce
quadratic expressions, and illustrate how they can be understood visually
and geometrically, using a fundamental class of
curves known as parabolas. Recall from the last module, that we discussed
equations of lines, one of the main forms of which is the slope intercept equation, which has the form
y equals mx plus k, where m is the slope and
k is the y-intercept. The combination of symbols
on the right-hand side, mx plus k, is called
a linear expression, and it is formed with just one multiplication
and one addition, which when you think about it is very rudimentary arithmetic, which is the whole point
of equations of lines. They are intended to be
simple and easy to handle. Let's gradually increase
the complexity. By adding a further
term involving the square of x and
another constant, so there are three constants renamed alphabetically
a, b, and c, to get what is called a quadratic expression
of the general form y equals ax squared plus
bx plus c. Remember a, b, c are constants
and x, y are variables. To be what we might call
a proper quadratic, we want a to be
non-zero for otherwise, the expression reverts
to just bx plus c, the linear case which
we've already considered. You might be curious the prefix quad in quadratic comes about
because there are four sides to a square
and x squared of course represents the area of a square of side length x. Indeed the simplest case is
just y equals x squared. When a is equal to one and b and c are
both equal to zero. What might the relationship look like between x and y equals x squared when we consider or
plot points in the x-y plane? Let's look at some simple values. When x equals 0, then
y is zero squared, which equals 0, so we get the point (0,0) which
is just the origin. When x equals 1, we get
y equals 1 squared equal to 1, so we get the point (1,1). When x equals minus 1, we get the same square value plus 1 and now the point (-1,1). When x equals 2 or minus 2, we get the same
square value plus 4, so you get the
points (2,4) and (-2,4). We can plot these five points
on the Cartesian x-y plane, and join the points
using a smooth curve. What we've produced is another very important curve
in the history and development of mathematics
known as a parabola. Let's look at some variations. The simplest example,
which was just discussed, arises when a equals 1, b equals c equals 0. If we take a equals
1 and b equals 0 again but take c equal to 2, we get y equals x squared plus 2. For enough variation, we
could take a equals 1, b equals 4 and c equals 4, to get y equals x
squared plus 4x plus 4. Let's sample some points (x,y)
for each of these curves, where the values we
input for x are 0, 1, minus 1, 2 and minus 2. Here are the five points that we obtained earlier for
y equals x squared, and now points for
y equals x squared plus 2, you can quickly
check by adding 2 to the y values in
the previous list. And also points for y equals x
squared plus 4x plus 4. The values for the third
example might look haphazard. But let's see what actually happens when we
plot the points on the x-y plane in each case and join the points
with smooth curves. Here's the parabola for y equals x squared that we found before. The second quadratic
y equals x squared plus 2 simply shifts these
y-values upwards by two units, and so the curve joining
these new points is just the original parabola
shifted upwards by two units. To plot the five points
for the third quadratic, we need some extra room, which we get by halving
the scale on the x and y axis from the diagrams
we used before, and you can easily check that we also get these other points. When x equals minus 3, minus 4, minus 5, and minus 6, and then join up the points
with a smooth curve, which again turns out
to be a parabola. If you include
the original parabola for y equals x squared, that's the blue curve
on the same diagram, you discover that
the pink curve is obtained by shifting the blue curve
uniformly two units to the left. Now how can that be? The rules for the quadratics
looks so different. Observe that, in fact, x squared plus 4x plus
4 is a perfect square. In the sense that it is
the square of x plus 2, which is really just x squared with x
replaced by x plus 2, so that to get the y-values
for the pink curve, all one needs to do is
input x values that are two units less than those
feeding into the blue curve, and the shifting
phenomenon is explained. In fact, every curve described by the general quadratic y
equals ax squared plus bx plus c is a parabola, and just the result of dilation and shifting up
and down or back and forth, the simplest parabola associated
with y equals x squared. This completely general fact, is not obvious, but it's explained
carefully in the notes, together with some principles
regarding dilations and shifts of general curves
in the x-y plane. If the constant a in the quadratic expression
happens to be negative, then the dilation effect includes also flipping the
parabola upside down. We often say by
reflecting in the x-axis. For example, consider
the parabola for y equals minus x squared where a is equal to minus one
and b and c are both zero, and we get an upside
down parabola. In fact, the result of
reflecting the parabola for y equals x squared in
the horizontal x-axis. Bowl-shape up becomes
bowl-shape down, using any horizontal reflection. Notice that the apex of the
parabola is at the origin. The apex turns out to be
important for applications. Here's a trickier one, y equals 2x minus x squared, just rearranged slightly to emphasize the minus x
squared term, and we know it must yield
an upside down parabola, because of the minus sign. But where does the parabola lie
on the x-y plane? Let's do some algebraic
manipulation. First write y as the negative of x squared
minus 2x, all in brackets, then use the technique of
completing the square, by adding and subtracting
one inside the brackets, as this doesn't change the overall value of the expression. Bring the minus minus 1 outside
the brackets as plus 1, and then recognize
the bracketed expression as the perfect square, x minus 1 squared. So finally, we've written
y as minus x minus 1, all squared, plus 1. To understand the curve, because what we've just done, we can relate this
in a natural way to the simplest upside
down parabola of all. Start with minus x squared, replace x by x minus 1, and then add 1, and you recover
the expression minus x minus 1, all squared, plus 1. You can see the visual
geometric effect of these two algebraic steps. Start off with the upside down parabola y equals
minus x squared. Take a copy of the parabola, and watch the effect of
shifting one unit to the right, corresponding algebraically
to replacing x by x minus 1, followed by moving one unit
vertically upwards, corresponding algebraically
to adding plus 1. You can see that we recover the pink parabola
from the green one. Notice how the apex of the green curve is
at the origin (0,0), and this is shifted
to the point (1,1), which becomes the apex
of the pink curve. Notice also how
the pink curve crosses the x-axis at x equals
0 and x equals 2. This makes perfectly
good sense since this occurs when y is equal to 0. If we go back to
the original expression, instead of completing the square, if we put y equal to 0, then we get a factorization
of zero in just one step, x times 2 minus x. And remember in an earlier video, we said that a factorization
of zero is very useful, leading to x equals
0 or x equals 2, where the curve
crosses the x-axis. There are lots of
different ways of looking at these curves, with experience, you would realize that one of the fastest ways to visualize examples like the parabola y
equals 2x minus x squared, is to recognize that
it's upside down, as the coefficient of
x squared is negative, and crosses the x-axis at values dictated by
a factorization of zero. There's much more that
can be said about parabolas especially
about the apex, the point where it turns around. To get a more complete story, we'll introduce and discuss the quadratic formula
in the next video. We've made a good beginning here
and covered a lot of ground, we've introduced
general quadratic expressions, shown how they correspond to important curves
known as parabolas, and illustrated how different parabolas relate to each other, especially by shifting and
turning things upside down, by reflecting in the x-axis. Please read the notes
and when you're ready, please attempt the exercises. Thank you very much for watching, and I look forward to
seeing you again soon.