[MUSIC] In today's video,
we introduce, explain, and illustrate the Quotient Rule which
enables us to differentiate a quotient of expressions in terms of the derivatives
of the numerator and denominator. Consider a function y of x which is
a quotient u divided by v where u and v are themselves functions of x. The quotient rule states that
the derivative of y with respect to x is v times the derivative of u, minus u times
the derivative of v all over v squared, expressed this way using Leibniz notation. Equivalently, using function notation and
a dash to denote the derivative, the quotient rule says y dashed is vu
dashed minus uv dashed all over v squared. It might look complicated at first, but it's remarkably elegant considering the
task at hand, which is to differentiate a possibly highly sophisticated
function expressed as a quotient. That we can do it at all is
surely something of a miracle. The quotient rule, in fact, follows
from the product and the chain rules. The reason is worth investigating, as it consolidates your understanding of
these rules and the way they fit together and makes your technique more robust and
stronger. Put y equal to u over v, which we can
write as a product u times 1 over v. Which we can further rewrite
as u times v to the  minus 1. Because this expression is a product,
naturally we can apply the product rule. So that dy/dx equals the first factor u
times the derivative of the second factor. But the second factor v to the minus 1 times
the derivative of the first factor. But the derivative of v to the minus 1
with respect to x may be expanded to become d/dv of v to the minus 1
times dv/dx by the chain rule, which becomes minus 1 times v
to the  minus 2 times dv/dx. Which can be rewritten as negative
dx dived by v squared. Hence the dy/dx becomes u
times this expression plus the second piece which can
be rewritten as dudx/v. And the first and
second pieces can be rewritten so the whole thing can becomes v
du/dx minus u du/dx all over v squared. Which is exactly the form of
the derivative in the quotient rule. This produces the Leibniz form which
immediately converts into the rule using dash notation. For example, let y equal quotient
x squared  plus 1 divided by x. And our task is to find the derivative,
y dash. We can solve this directly by
splitting y up into two fractions, which becomes x plus x to the minus 1, and
then differentiate each piece. The derivative of the first piece is 1 and the derivative of the second
piece is minus 1 times x to the minus 2. Which becomes 1 minus 1 over x squared,
which we can leave as that or rewrite as a single fraction,
x squared minus 1 over x squared. An alternative solution is to apply the
quotient rule because y is the quotient of u divided by v where u is the numerator x
squared plus 1, and v is the denominator x. So that u dashed is 2x, and v dashed is 1. So by the quotient rule, y dashed is
vu dash minus uv dash all over v squared, and we can put all the pieces together. Expand, simplifying a couple
steps to get x squared minus 1 over x squared which agrees
with our first direct solution. Here's a more complicated expression for
y and our task again is to find
the derivative y dash. Observe that y is the quotient, u divided
by v, where u is the numerator and v is the denominator with derivatives
u dash and v dash respectively. We apply the quotient rule, and
put all the pieces together. The derivative of y dash is complicated,
and I'm not even going to try to simplify it. I just made up this example for the
purposes of illustration, and have no idea what the graph of the function looks like,
or even whether the function corresponds to some interesting or
important problem, or physical phenomenon. The point I want to emphasize in
an example like this is that we can find the derivative quickly by means
of the rules that we developed. And the process becomes quite
mechanical and procedural. Something quite remarkable has happened. Just in the space of a few videos, we have moved from basic definitions
of the derivative to being able to differentiate such sophisticated
functions fluently and easily. Even though we don't know what the curve
looks like, this expression for the derivative, in principle, allows us to
find slopes of tangent lines at any given point in which the expression is defined. And therefore, to find the equation or
the tangent line at a given point and thereby approximate
values of the function. In my opinion,
this is an extraordinary achievement. And if you follow the development
up to this point, then you should be congratulated
on coming so far so quickly. In an earlier video I told you what
the derivative of tan x turns out to be. Let's see if we can discover it ourselves. Observe that tan x is sin x over cos x, which becomes a fraction u over
v where u equals sin x and v equals cos x. So that u dash is cos x,
And v dashed is  minus sin x. By the quotient rule,
the derivative of tan x with respect to x becomes vu dash minus uv
dash all over v squared. And we put the pieces together. And the denominator becomes cos squared x. Whilst, the numerator becomes cos
squared x plus sin squared x, which you might recognize as simplifying
to 1 by the circular identity. And the answer becomes
1 over cos squared x. This agrees with the answer
that I told you some time ago without giving any reason. Now, there's some common notation and
terminology that you should become aware of involving another
trig function called the secant. We put sec x equal to 1 over cos x,
the reciprocal of cos x, where sec is an abbreviation for secant. This word is related to lines, drawing certain points in diagrams
involving the unit circle, in the context of more
advanced trigonometry, but I won't go into the details. And you can look it up yourselves,
if you wish, out of interest. This new terminology,
the derivative of tan x becomes a square of sec x,
which is written as sec squared x. You can continue to think of
the derivative as 1 over cos squared x if you like. But you'll almost certainly see the sec
notation in your mathematical travels. The secant function simply reciprocates
the value of the cosine function. There's special terminology also for reciprocating the value
of the sine function. Put csc x equal to cosec x
equal to 1 over sine x, where csc and cosec are both
common abbreviations for cosecant. There's one more, put cot x equal to cotan x equal cos x divided by sin x,
which is the reciprocal of tan x. And here cot and cotan are common
abbreviations for cotangent. Thus cosecant and cotangent, again have
geometric interpretations in more advanced trigonometry which I won't go into here. And we will not need either
of them in this course. We have from before, the derivative tan x is 1 over cos squared
x expressed also as sec squared x. For completeness,
though we will not need it, and you can check it yourself if you wish, the derivative cot x or
cotan x is negative 1 over sin squared x. Which you can express as negative cos x
squared x using either abbreviation. In today's video, we introduced and
illustrated the quotient rule. Which enables you to differentiate
a quotient of expressions in terms of the derivatives of
the numerator and denominator. We explained how it comes about as results
of applying the product and chain rules. By expressing the quotient as a product,
the numerator with the reciprocal of the denominator.
Ee gave some contrasting examples and importantly, found a formula for
the derivative of tan x. Namely, the reciprocal of cos squared x,
which can also be expressed as sec squared x,
where sec is an abbreviation for secant. The values of the secant function
are the reciprocals of the values of the cosine function. Please read the notes, and when you're
ready, please attempt the exercises. Thank you very much for watching, and
I look forward to seeing you again soon. [MUSIC]