[MUSIC] In today's video, we discuss the logistic function used
to model population dynamics where an inhibition factor is included in the
expression describing the rate of growth. The logistic model includes a ceiling
on the size of the population. The resulting curve is increasing,
has a sigmoid shape, and sits between two horizontal asymptotes. There's a point of
inflection halfway between, about which the curve has
180-degree rotational symmetry. We begin with a simpler
exponential growth model. Suppose we have a population of size x(t),
which is a function of time t and want to understand its behavior. This model assumes that the derivative
of x is some multiple k of x, with k is a positive constant. One can imagine without any limit of
resources that the more there is of the colony, the faster it should grow. So the growth rate should be proportional
to the size of the population. This is an example of
differential equation. Note that though x appears
on the right-hand side, x is being used as a dependent variable. The independent variable is t, not x,
and anti-differentiating the right-hand side with respect to x will
not make any progress. It needs some careful preparation
to unravel this equation. You first multiply both sides
by the differential to t, and dividing through by x
gives dx on x = k dt. We now apply integral
symbols to both sides to get equality of antiderivatives
of the respective integrands. The differential on
the left-hand side involves x, whilst the differential on
the right-hand side involves t. An antiderivative 1 on x with
respect to x is ln of x, and an antiderivative of a constant
k with respect to t is just kt. We amalgamate constants of integration together
with a single + C on the right. We can raise Euler's number
e to the power of each side. On the left we get x back again, and on the right we get e to the kt + c,
which we can expand. Thus x = A times e to the kt for some constant A by putting A = e to the c. Notice that we've reproduced
the familiar exponential growth function whose graph is the exponential curve. Note that x labels the vertical axis and
t the horizontal axis. Exponential growth is unlimited. The x values get arbitrarily
large as t increases. Of course, this isn't a realistic
model when resources are limited. We now modify the previous model to
take into account constraints placed on populations by the environment and
limited resources. We adjust the right hand side of
the equation dx, dt equals kx by introducing a factor 1 minus x on M,
for some new constant capital M. Think of M for the largest, or
maximal sustainable population. The factor kx remains untouched, and contributes towards
the growth of the population. The factor 1 minus x on M is carefully
designed to model inhibition. If x is small,
then this factor is close to 1, and the left-hand side is almost exactly kx,
as in the original exponential model. However, if x is large, getting close to
M, the factor 1- x on M gets close to 0, causing the overall growth rate,
dx dt, to slow down to almost nothing. This modification is called
the logistic growth model widely used in population dynamics. We get what's called a logistic
equation whose solutions are called logistic functions. Let's now try to unravel
the logistic equation. We first multiply through both
sides through the differential, dt. Keep the constant, k,
on the right-hand, next to dt, but move the factors x, and 1 minus x on
M to the other side, by division. We separate the variables by
putting x's to the left and t's to the right,
including their differentials. We assume implicitly throughout that the
population x always lies between 0 and M. We add integral signs to both sides to
create functions by anti-differentiation. On the right hand side a general antiderivative to the
constant k with respect to t is kt plus C. The left-hand side, however, is a mystery. Here's the left-hand side again, rewritten to express the integrand
as a rational function. To motivate the next step, we first play with some
ordinary fractions involving numbers. For example,
one-sixth is 1 divided by 2 times 3. Which a half minus a third, which we
can write as 1 over 2 plus negative 1 over 3. Similarly, one-thirty-third
= 1 over 3 x 11. And you can check quickly this becomes
two lots of one-third + negative 7 lots of one-eleventh. Both one-sixth and one-thirty-third
decompose into combinations involving simpler fractions, a half,
a third, and one-eleventh. It's like recognizing that water is H2O or
common salt is sodium chloride. Here's a tougher fraction,
one-ninety-ninth = 1 over 9 x 11. How can we decompose that? Let's postulate that it becomes A lots
of the 9th, plus B lots of 11th. We put the right-hand side
together as a single fraction, where the numerator becomes 11A plus 9B. We want this to equal 1. And it helps to find multiples of 11 and
9 that differ by 1. Say 44 which is 4 times 11,
and 45 which is 5 times 9. By using negative 44 and positive 45, we get a total of 1. Thus, we should take A to be  negative 4 and
B to be 5. And then one ninety ninth decomposes as -4
to the ninth plus 5 lots of one eleventh. Let's try something similar
with the integrand above, which is a fraction involving polynomials
in x, rather than just numbers. The numerator is 1. The denominator is complicated,
with factors x and 1-x on M. Let's postulate a decomposition
using A lots of 1 on x and B lots of 1 over 1 minus x on M. Rewrite the right hand side with a common
denominator, obtaining a numerator that has to become 1 to agree with
the numerator on the left-hand side. If we take A equals 1, then we get 1
minus x on M, and just need to choose B to make the minus x on M go away, and
B equal to 1 on M does the trick. Thus the rational function
decomposes as this sum. And the right-hand side can be written
more simply as 1 on x + 1 over M- x. What we've done in an ad hoc way
is a special case of the method of partial fractions, a topic you'll meet
in more advanced courses in calculus. To perform this integration,
it suffices to integrate 1 on x and 1 on M-x separately, and
add the answers together. The population x lies between 0 and M,
so that both x and M-x are positive. An antiderivative of 1 on x is ln of x and of 1 over M-x is negative ln of M- x. For the second one you can use
the guess and check method, or integration by substitution. We combine the constants of integration
together with a plus C dash at the right. The difference of logarithms is
the logarithm of the quotient, and we rewrite the expression inside the
logarithm to isolate x, in preparation for the next step. Our aim, remember,
is to unravel the logistic equation and we produced this difficult integral
which we've just managed to solve. We can put everything together and amalgamate the constants on the right
using, again, just a single plus C. We want explicit information about x and it's buried in the expression
on the left hand side. We first raise Euler's number e to
the power of each side of the equation. So the ln is stripped away
from the left hand side, and the right hand side becomes e to
the kt plus c, which can be expanded. We reciprocate everything and
rewrite the right-hand side. We add 1 to both sides, and now rewrite the right hand side as 1 plus
capital K e to the negative little kt, with capital K is the positive constant,
e to the negative C. We rearrange this to obtain an explicit
form of x, finally solving the logistic equation and its solution is
known as the logistic function. In writing down the logistic equation, there were two positive constants
involved, little k and capital M. In developing the general solution
of the logistic function, we introduced a new positive
constant capital K. This function has several
important features. Firstly, the population x
always lies between 0 and M where M represents a limiting
upper bound or maximum. Indeed, the limit of x of t as t
gets arbitrary large and positive to M because the expression e to the negative
kt, which is one of e to the kt, goes to 0. You can think of M as the largest
sustainable population in an environment with only limited resources. On the other hand, the limit of x(t),
as t gets arbitrarily large and negative, will be 0, because now, the expression e
to the negative kt will become arbitrary large and positive, and
it appears in the denominator. The variable t represents time, so the first limit represents
limiting behavior in the future. The second limit represents limiting
behavior going backwards in time to the distance past. In the original differential equation we
can rewrite the right hand side as k on M times x times M-x,
which is a quadratic in x. Let's graph this quadratic regarding dx,
dt as a function of x. You can see that it must
be an upside down parabola which passes through the x axis when
x equals 0 and when x equals M, and has an apex when x is exactly halfway
between, that is when x equals M on 2. At this apex, the derivative
dx/dt is maximised. This tells us that the growth rate is maximized when
x happens to be halfway between 0 and M. We can now sketch the graph
of x as a function of t. From features 2 and 3,
we can see that x equals M and the the t axis form two horizontal asymptotes,
and the curve has to fit in between. From feature 4, the growth rate is
maximized when x has M on 2 and the corresponding point on the curve
will be a point of inflection. Moving down to the t axis will reveal
the time on which the growth rate is maximized. You can see a direct connection with
the usual exponential function. If you look at the rule for
x of t when the denominator is large, the +1 becomes negligible. By removing the +1, you get a simplified
expression, which becomes a constant times e to the kt,
which is the usual exponential function. This approximation effect occurs
towards the left of the graph at time t before the curve gets near
the point of inflection. The model indicates that the population is
growing approximately exponentially until factors kick in to halt the growth. The population is growing
as fast as possible at the moment, it reaches M on 2, and
after that slows down and continues to slow down as it gets closer and closer
to the maximum carrying capacity of M. [MUSIC]