Hi, welcome back.
Make yourself comfortable. Let's take a few minutes to understand one
particular country on the eve of World War I: Imperial
Germany. I call it Schizophrenic Germany because it seems to have at least two different
personalities. Why focus on Germany? If you were going to look at the empires
whose insecurities and fears are at the root of
what happened in 1914, you wouldn't just look at
Germany. You'd be very interested in looking, for
example, at Austria-Hungary. The Austro-Hungarian Empire, ruled by the
Habsburg Dynasty. You'd be very interested in looking at the
Russian Empire; they play a key role too.
So, why Germany? It's because, I think more than any other
single country, Germany controlled the strategic
initiative in this crisis. What do I mean by that term? Strategic. Initiative. What I mean: the country that has a
strategic initiative, or even the company or the
individual that has a strategic initiative in an
engagement, whether it's a football game or a war, is the country or the side that's really able
to set the time, place, and manner of
engagement. They control the setting in which this
happens. And I think when you look closely at the
crisis in 1914, the German Empire, more than any other single
country, controlled the time, place, and manner of the decision to
risk general war that year. These other empires certainly have a really important role and, if you want, give them a large share of the
blame. But the German Empire's role, I think, is
unique as we'll see when we get into that in more
detail. When you look at the German Empire on a map, it often just says Germany; that's
misleading. When you dig into, what is the German
Empire, it's actually a deeply split government. Here's a map of the German Empire in these
years. What you see is a really big kingdom.
That's in blue. That kingdom in blue, that's the Kingdom
of Prussia, but you see a lot of other countries inside
the German Empire. For instance, down here at the bottom, you
see the Kingdom of Bavaria; or right here, that's the Kingdom of
Württemberg. Here's the Grand Duchy of Baden. Here's the kingdom of Saxony with its
capital in Dresden, and so on. In other words, Germany actually is the
German Empire, and the German Empire consists of a number
of different states ruled by kings, princes, and dukes
of their own. These different states have their own
governments. They're responsible for providing many of
their own social services, and they also create and command their own
smaller armies, which are harmonized, standard uniforms,
equipment, and so on, in the larger imperial army. So, on the top you have this guy the
Kaiser, a German word derived from the Latin Caesar.
The Kaiser is the head of the German Empire, but as head
of the German Empire all he really controls is the army, the
navy, foreign affairs. He doesn't really run many of the ordinary
functions of government as the head of the German
Empire. The Kaiser is also a king. He's the King of Prussia, so he wears two
Hats: King of Prussia and Kaiser of the Empire. As King of Prussia, he's the king of a
very large state that has all these services: its own parliament, civil service, everything
else. When you wears his hat as Kaiser of the
Empire, he answers to a parliament: the Imperial Parliament, the Reichstag. The Reichstag basically doesn't have very
many powers, except it does have a lot of control over the
budget. Over how much money the emperor gets for the army and
the navy in his Imperial role. So, in addition to the Kaiser really
wearing two hats as the king of one state of the
empire, but who's answerable to some degree to
this Imperial Parliament, you've also got politics in Germany that
are deeply divided, as in so many of these modern
nation-states. In Germany, the Kaiser is the
representative of an old nobility. He and his large land-owning, entitled
friends are a tiny minority of the German population and feel alienated by a lot of modern culture and some of the modern political
parties. And then in turn, the parties are divided up among the lines we've talked about
before. The National Tradition, they're a very
small faction. The National Conservatives, Liberals,
Democratic Socialists, there are some Revolutionary Socialists but they don't take part in
politics. Here's the Kaiser in 1914, his name is
Wilhelm II. He's not really the guy you want by your
side in a crunch. He's an intelligent man, a grandson of Queen Victoria of England,
but he always resented his English mother. He was born with a kind of defect because of the circumstances of his birth
that withered one of his arms and always made him a little extra anxious to prove his masculinity and athletic or
hunting skill. Who's really running the government of the
empire? The day-to-day running of the imperial
government was entrusted to this man, Theobald von
Bethmann Hollweg. Bethmann Hollweg though, is not like a prime minister or a chancellor would be
today. You'd think of a prime minister as the
politician whose party has the most votes in the
Imperial Parliament. No. Bethmann-Hollweg, he's just a Prussian
career civil servant. He's appointed to his job as the
chancellor by the Kaiser. He's not a politician, and he has no
political base in the Imperial Parliament. He serves at the
whim of his crowned master. In foreign affairs, Germany is beginning to feel a bit
encircled. Here they are in the center of Europe. Here's large Russia over here. It was really weakened by the revolutions
of 1905, but it's recovering its military power and
now has the most numerous army in Europe. And here's France over here, still eager
for revenge from its defeat in the
Franco-Prussian War. The Germans feel hemmed in in their search
for colonies. And so here are the Germans, they feel
like they've become the most powerful country on the
continent of Europe, but nonetheless feel defensive, encircled,
and worried that their enemies are going to get stronger
than they are. The Germans are encouraged to find their
place in the sun by being a dominant power in middle Europe,
in middle Europa, in central Europe. They're partly encouraged in this hope by this man, Sir Edward Grey. He's the British Foreign Minister trying
to manage the balance of power, trying to diffuse
crises, trying to keep the British from having to get involved in some military conflict on
the continent. By 1912, the Kaiser and some of the nobles
around him increasingly feel like the world is moving
in the wrong direction. Their reasons for feelings that are partly domestic and
partly international. Let's take a look here at what's happening
to them in domestic politics. The Germans have a national election in
1912. In an earlier presentation, we talked about
the basic kinds of political parties you'd find in the modern
world in this period. Armed with that knowledge, you too can interpret the German election results of
1912. Let's take a look. So, on the very far left, you'd have the
Revolutionary Socialists. Well, they're not participating in the
election because they believe in the violent overthrow of
the government. So, they're not represented here. Next, on the left, you'd have the
Democratic Socialists, these are the Marxists who are willing to
participate in government. In Germany, that's the Social Democratic
Party, right here. So, those are your Democratic Socialists.
Then, you have your Liberals. The Liberals really group into those who are more
pro-imperial and those who are a little more
anti-militaristic. The more leftist Liberals are here. The more right-wing Liberals are here. But the Liberal parties taken together win
this many seats. Here's the Catholic Center Party. The Catholic Center Party is not easy to
categorize. A lot of their views are really Liberal. They're in favor of religious tolerance,
because the Catholics feel like they've been battling against the German
State for the last 40 years. But, on the other hand, they do believe in
traditional values and they definitely do not like
the anti-Catholic Marxists. So, I would classify the centrum, the
Catholic Center, as being a little more on the Liberal side of the
spectrum, literally kind of in the center. On the more conservative side, what I'd
call the National Conservatives, that would really be these
two parties right here: the German Conservative Party and the
German Imperial Party. But between them, that's only 57 seats. Here's some other national minority
parties, including a party that called itself the Anti-Semitic Party, because it was so
proud that it was anti-Jewish. The Farmer's Party and some of other
motley groups. But if you look at this as a whole, this is a very discouraging election
result for the Kaiser. If you break it down, you'll see that what
they regard as the far left is 30% of the
Parliament. The Liberals make up another 24%, so the majority of the parliament are either
Marxists or Liberals. The Catholic Center is another 25%, and the National Conservatives are definitely
in the minority. So, you have one Germany, the Germany of
the Liberals, the Germany of the universities, the
Germany of the businessmen. And the working class, represented by a
Marxist political party, is the largest political party in the German Parliament.
So, that's one face of Germany. From the point of view of the Kaiser, the 1912 election results are telling him
that the trend lines are not going in the right direction for the future of him and his
kindred. Now let's talk about the international
side of what's happening in 1912. But to do that we have to spend a little time on understanding the Balkans and
that's worth the presentation in itself.
See you next time.