Hi.
Welcome back. Make yourself comfortable. In the video presentation we did last time, we looked at Imperial Germany, and
we saw some of the domestic factors that
would have made the Kaiser really uneasy during
1912. Now let's look at some of the
international factors that were on the mind of him and some of the people in
his circle. They mainly have to do with the Balkans,
cause Germany is getting sucked into the Balkan
whirlpool. Let's explain more about what I mean. The Balkans are the part of Southeastern
Europe that is anti-imperialist. They're against the Austro-Hungarian
Empire. They're against the Ottoman Empire, the
Turkish rulers that had oppressed them. They've thrown off imperial rule but now
they're full of quarrels with each other. Let's take a closer look at these toxic anti-imperialisms. This map shows the Austro-Hungarian Empire
on the eve of the war. What you see here is this part of Europe,
all here in green, used to be under the rule of the
Ottoman Empire. But the Ottomans have been driven mainly
out of this part of Europe. This area is now a battleground of warring new nationalities.
In 1908, this area, Bosnia, which contains people of a variety of different
religions and languages, is annexed by the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
And the battles continue. There are Balkan wars in 1912.
Another war in 1913. Here's a French map from about the middle
of 1913 just giving you a little bit of a sense of
it. You don't have to follow the detail of
this. The main thing about the map to notice, look up here, there's the
Austro-Hungarian Empire. Down here, here's the former Ottoman
Empire, now referred to on the maps as Turkey, because it's becoming a modern
nation-state under those young Turks. This is the battleground.
Bulgarians, Serbians, Romanians, Montenegrins, Macedonians, Greeks,
Albanians, all fighting; Catholics, Greek Orthodox, Muslims, trying
to determine the extent of their rule. The Turks are pushed back. The Turks make some in-roads again.
The Bulgarians get larger. The Bulgarians get smaller and so on. Do the big empires care about what happens
here? Yes.
Who cares? The bordering empires. The Austro-Hungarian Empire doesn't want
their own empire to be broken up by these aggressive,
ambitious, anti-imperial nationalities. The Turks feel threatened; the Russian
Empire over here, empathizes with their Slav
counterparts here in Serbia. So what happens then are proxy wars. The Austro-Hungarian Empire is backing the
play of the Albanians and others against the
Serbs. The Russians, on the other hand, are on
the Serbian side. The Serbs, for their part, have large ambitions to become themselves a South
Slav empire. So what's the big takeaway from this grim
story of Balkan wars? For the Austro-Hungarians and their German
allies, Serbian nationalists haven't been
sufficiently dealt with. There's still a threat there. They've held them at bay, but they're frustrated, and they're worried about the
next war. For the Russians, they're frustrated and
angered that the Austro-Hungarians were able to have their way because the Germans
were behind them. A lot of the resentment actually is
focused on the British. The 1912 Balkan war was settled by Treaty
of London because the British intervened diplomatically to
put a lid on the situation. Actually, here's a cartoonist calling
attention all the European powers trying to keep the
cauldron from exploding. There's the emblem of Britain, John Bull,
also sitting on top of the lid. The Austrians, the Germans, the French, the Russians join in.
I use the phrase here, accelerants. An accelerant is gasoline, and the Balkan
wars are kind of gasoline that's lying around, waiting to be set alight,
which is what will happen in 1914. But the events of 1912 are really changing the way people are thinking about their
problems. An especially critical moment is at the end of 1912.
The Germans hold a fateful war council. The British have just gotten involved
diplomatically to put a stop the Balkan war of 1912, and keep the
Austro-Hungarians from putting their boot into the Serbs. The Germans were furious about it. It's the form their fury takes that's so
interesting. What I want to show you here are some glimpses
into Kaiser Wilhelm's mind. These are just some notes that he's making
on key documents during December 1912. For instance, in this document, the Kaiser
is jotting down words like balance of power, idiocy.
And his observation about the crisis is: Britain is too
cowardly openly to leave France and Russia in the lurch on
this occasion, he means this Balkan War. And because the British envy and hate us,
other powers, like us he means, are not to be allowed to defend
their interests with the sword. And if they do so in spite of all assurances, Britain will take action
against us. What a nation of shopkeepers, he notes.
This is what it calls a peace policy! And the Kaiser actually knew some English
and wrote down balance of power in English and then back
to German again. Notice the sentence, the final struggle
between the Slavs and the Teutons, meaning the Germans, will see the Anglo-Saxons,
meaning the British, on the side of the Slavs and the Gauls. Of course, Slavs meaning the Russians, the
Gauls meaning the French. But, notice a couple of things about this. The sense that a final struggle is coming, that
fatalism. The way in which, instead of talking about
the states as states, he's talking about them
as racial groups. And it's a contest of races coming to a
final struggle. It's that kind of apocalyptic feelings that leaps from
the page. Give you another illustration. Here's a telegram that Kaiser is
personally composing a few days later to one of his
ambassadors. Envy and hatred of Germany will definitely make Britain support France and Russia
against us. The struggle for existence, which the
Germanic peoples in Europe, Austria, Germany, will eventually
have to fight against the Slavs, that's his parenthesis,
not mine, supported by the Latins, or Gauls, finds
the Anglo-Saxons on the side of the
Slavs. The reason: dog-in-the-manger attitude,
sort of a spoiler attitude, we're going to frustrate the Germans becoming so powerful,
and fear that we might become great. Again you see the same kind of apocalyptic
thinking. The cold facts of what's going on in the
Balkan crisis wouldn't necessarily cause any dispassionate
observer to come to these sorts of conclusions. In other words, the facts of what's going
on in this crisis are being filtered through a world view, which he's displaying to you through these historical
records. So after these events at the end of 1912, the Germans are quietly making
some critical decisions. First, they decide that the final struggle
is coming. It will be better to have a preventive
war, have the war sooner rather than later, before the Russians get too strong, along with their French
allies. Second, they talked to Austria-Hungary,
and they let them know that the next time you have a really serious
crisis, we're going to be behind you 100%, we need to
settle this definitively. They encouraged the Austro-Hungarians to
take the hard line, and they were refine war plans that are going to require a further
buildup of the German army and also lock them into a plan where even if the
war starts in the Balkans, the Germans are going to prepare to wage that war by
fighting it in France and Belgium. So as 1913 unfolds, there are more
troubles in the Balkans, the German military buildup goes ahead, the
Russians and the French are responding. Each side is watching, even more nervously,
the arms competition among the others. The arms race, especially among the land
armies, intensifies. And relations between the German Empire
and the Russian Empire get even more tense,
especially as the Germans are reaching out more and
more to make common cause with the Turks. So by 1914, there's now a lot of gasoline
lying around in the room. Most of the world doesn't understand all
of this. The world isn't aware of some of the decisions that have been made between
Germany and Austria-Hungary. But in 1914, the match will be struck in
that room. That's what we'll talk about next time. See you then.