[BLANK_AUDIO] Hi.
Welcome back. In the presentation today, I'm going to
try to zoom in on some choices made, especially in late 1916, about
whether to continue the war. When we talk about the continuation of
World War I, you see theses nightmarish horrors that
are going on in 1914, 15, 16, so how could people continue, how could statesman
let their countries go on? Well they made choices; it helps to really
try to understand their choices. These were not stupid people, so to
understand their choices, as we talked very early on,
choices are stories. They're stories in which people confront a
Situation; they try to make sense of it; they see their problems there; and they try
to figure out what's the best way I can solve these
problems. Which then may create a new situation. So, then what we're going to try to do is
look at how some of the key players saw the
situation by the late summer of 1916, in order to
understand why their choices merged together so that
this terrible war continued. Let's turn our attention back to the
United States of America, led by Woodrow Wilson, and its attitude
toward all of this in 1916. One of the first things to understand about Wilson's America is that it was
neutral. It was out of the war, and it was doing extremely well as a
result. The United States was becoming a supplier
mainly to the British and French because the
British and French mainly controlled sea lanes and
could buy and ship stuff from the United States, and American farmers and merchants were
making a huge amount of money out of the war. These were good times for American
agriculture. Also Wilson doesn't want America to be
involved in the war. And Wilson, the American president, really
has a firm grip on controlling American
foreign policy. Really to an almost extreme degree, American foreign policy in
1916 was the policy of Woodrow Wilson. Who was Woodrow Wilson? The son of a minister.
Former president of a university. A high minded intellectual. But also, a very willful and skillful
politician. Forceful orator. What were his positions about the war?
First, he was pretty scornful of the great power rivalries that had led these countries
into the war. He had no sympathy for what they were trying to achieve and would have been
happy if the war had just gone back to the
territories and situations that had existed before the
war started. He didn't strongly sympathize with one
side as being right and another side as being
wrong. He wanted America therefore to stay out of
the war. [SOUND]
But here's the rub. He knew that if the war continued, America was likely to be pulled into it.
If he wanted to avoid war, he had to look for ways to stop it. Because as the war escalated, the Germans
could not tolerate the United States being the supplier of goods and
money to only one side. Nor did Wilson feel the United States
could tolerate having its trade cut off by
either side. The freedom of America to be allowed to
trade with the world was regarded by many Americans as
something that was just essential to their
prosperity. Here's a wonderful photograph of Woodrow
Wilson. We have this kind of caricatured image of him today as this somewhat unworldly
idealist. He was indeed quite idealistic,
but he was also a highly practical person. So if Wilson wanted to bring the war to an end, did he have any leverage over the
combatants? He did.
First, he was regarded, with some cause, as being genuinely neutral about which
side was right and which side was wrong. And there was a precedent, going back to the Russo-Japanese War, of when another American president, that one Theodore
Roosevelt, had actually been called upon to serve as an arbitrator in bringing the war to an
end. He had a lot of leverage from the German point of view because if they escalated their
submarine attacks, if the US goes to war, that would be bad
for the German side. He had a lot of leverage over the British.
Not because he was going to declare war on the
British. That was inconceivable by this time. The British and the Americans had gone a
long way toward making up their differences, especially in
the 1890s and early 1900s. The real leverage America had over the
British: The U.S. was loaning them the money and
selling them the means. And indeed, the U.S. was loaning the British the money
that they could use to buy the goods they needed from the United
States to continue to wage the war. If the United States threatened to choke
off that flow of funds to Great Britain in some way, that would be immediate substantial leverage over the
British side. And the British, in turn, were the key
financiers of the whole Allied war effort. So, in theory, Wilson had a lot of
potential leverage. One problem was: Was the US entering the war scary
enough to the German? Because Wilson would not build up the
American army. So some German generals discounted how
dangerous the Americans might be or thought it would take too long for the
Americans to make their presence felt if they got
involved in the war. And there was some question as to: Were the
Americans really willing to use their theoretical
financial leverage against the British? Would they have the nerve to use it
against the people who are buying so much of their
stuff? In 1916, Wilson's foreign policy situation
was this: He tried a peace move in the first half of the year;
it had Failed, but it had failed because all of
the different sides still had their big war plans to try to
win in 1916. They weren't going to be interested in
peace until those plans failed. Those plans had not clearly failed until
the second half of 1916. Until August or September. Internally though, by August and September,
Wilson is running for re-election. That will concentrate his attention. He's in a tough election campaign against
the Republican candidate: Charles Evans Hughes. The election will be at the beginning of
November 1916. The chronology's important. Now, let's swing our attention to Berlin,
and look at how the German leaders analyzed their
situation by the late summer of 1916. [NOISE] They are feeling great strain at
this point. Tactically, their position is okay. Their armies are, after all, on French and Belgian territory, not on German
territory. But strategically, they can't see any clear
path to how they win the war. The one panacea they can think of is to rely on submarines to cut the ties of Britain
and her allies from the rest of the world. But use the submarines, you bring the United
States into war. So, a lot of strain, tactically okay but the overall outlook grim. And as the war goes on, Bethmann
increasingly feels like if we go into this all-out submarine
warfare, all-out war domestically, I'm going to lose control of the
situation. We're going to have to become a different
kind of country. The military is going to take over. In effect, Bethmann, the civilian
chancellor for the Kaiser thinks: If we don't settle this war pretty soon, it's going to escalate in ways in which
it's pretty much going to pass out of my hands, and Germany's going to turn into a
military dictatorship dedicated to trying to wage an all-out
war. He doesn't want to go there unless he has
to, but they have to settle it soon. If they don't get
something done soon, then by late 1916 they're going to have to
start writing their plans for an all-out submarine attack in
1917 that will bring the United States into the war.
So the Germans reach out, looking for urgent US mediation to try to end the war. Let's take a look for instance at some of the interesting telegrams that were
exchanged between Bethmann-Hollweg and the German ambassador
in Washington. The ambassador for example is pointing out
that the Americans do not want to get involved in
the war. As the German ambassador observes in the
summer of 1916, when all is said and done, the American people
are pacifistically inclined. It becomes clearer day by day, how
difficult it is to arouse a feeling for preparedness for war, et cetera. Whoever has lived here for a long time cannot
avoid the conviction that the Americans' aim in life
is the peaceful acquisition of wealth. It is only when he believes that a deep
injustice has been done him that he allows himself to be carried along in the current of an hysterical war
sentiment. Bethmann-Hollweg's answer. Writing from Berlin in early September
1916, he talks about the situation. The fronts are holding fast, but hope to
conclude peace before winter, as the exhaustion of Russia or France by
the war is lessened by this development. He's referring to the entry of Romania
into the war on the side of the Allies. In case no major catastrophe should occur
in the East, would peace mediation by Wilson be possible and
successful if we were to guarantee Belgium's unconditional restoration? Otherwise, the unrestricted U-boat war,
those are their submarines, U-boats, U-boat war will have to be carried on in dead
earnest. Bernstorff believes President Wilson will
make a peace move, but he's worried that it may be delayed until after
the presidential election. That really worries Bethmann-Hollweg, who
writes back to his ambassador that the supreme high command of the army is already looking at the unrestricted U-boat
war. That situation would change if President
Wilson will make his move. But, some action of this kind must occur
before long since we are not in a position to remain quiet any longer.
That's in late September of 1916. In other words, they're anxious to end the
war quickly before matters escalate in a way that will
not only take the war in a new direction but maybe be the end of normal civilian rule
in Germany, as the military high command gets
its way. Now let's switch the scene to yet one more absolutely key player: the
British leadership. The British Government in the summer of
1916 is headed by the last great Liberal prime minister,
Herbert Asquith. The war's increasingly overwhelming him as
a politician and as a person. As he looks at these issues of war and
peace in the late summer of 1916, Asquith and his wife are distraught by the news
that their own son has just been killed in
France. Britain too is under enormous strain, not clear what else they can do to bring
the war to a successful conclusion. The British public through the popular
press is getting encouraging news about what's
happening in the Battle of the Somme, but little can
hide that the front line has not advanced and that the cost is simply terrible. This photograph gives you one illustration
of the devastation. As you can see that practically every bit of vegetation has been destroyed. When
these shells explode, the metal fragments, the shrapnel, shreds anything
that's more than a foot above the ground. Here are some of the walking wounded
heading back from the front. In this case, what appears to be a German
Prisoner, possibly blinded by poison gas, is being helped back by one
of the British wounded. This is part of the debris of war. This is simply used shell casings from
some of the artillery that's been firing into the
front lines. Asquith makes his move, too. In August
1916, he asks all the leaders of his Cabinet to
ponder what the aims would be for a continuation
of the war. One answer to Asquith's question comes from the most dynamic politician in his cabinet, a Welshman named David Lloyd
George. Here's a photograph of Lloyd George. Lloyd George was a Liberal politician, but
He had very much seen himself as a man representing the Welsh miners,
representing the working class, a spokesman for social insurance, for
government help. When it came to war, Lloyd George
presented himself as the dynamic man, the man who could lead Britain to victory. And indeed, Lloyd George begins to see
this moment as the one when he will become the war
leader. He will become prime minister.
He's smart. He doesn't see any panacea for a big
breakthrough on the Western Front. He's also highly critical of the quality
of British generalship. He has some ideas for using a blockade,
for trying to attack Germany and its allies at the
margins somehow. But he's determined that Britain just has
to continue, and his answer is to go public in September 1916,
and tell journalists that what Britain needs to do is to plan on a
knockout blow and be willing just to fight it all
the way through. He sets himself out to the public as the man who is willing to do whatever is
needed. In contrast to Lloyd George, inside the
Cabinet discussions, Asquith gets an extraordinary memo from
one of the senior statesmen in his government,
Lord Lansdowne. Lansdowne has held several of the highest
posts the British government can give, even going back to the
late 1800s. This elder, conservative statesman,
this sober stalwart of British foreign policy, now writes a remarkable
secret memo to his Cabinet colleagues. Lansdowne puts his views down in a memo to
his colleagues in November 1916. I'm actually reading from the reprinting
of this memo in Lloyd George's own memoirs, because
Lloyd George regarded what he called this courageous memo, as
the key opposing view to the one that he was
putting forward. Lansdowne argued: I do not suppose for an
instant that there is any weakening in the spirit of the
people of this country. And that he hoped that the same might be
said of our allies. But neither in their interests nor in ours
can it be desirable that the war should be
prolonged, unless it can be shown that we can bring it to an effectual conclusion within a
reasonable space of time. So, what does the prolongation of the war
mean? Our own casualties already amount to over
1.1 million. We've had 15,000 officers killed, not
including those who are missing. There's no reason to suppose that as the
force at the front and the different theaters of war increases,
the casualties will increase at a slower rate. We are slowly but surely killing off the best of the male population of these
islands. As for the Allies the total must be
appalling. Financial. The financial burden which we have already
accumulated is almost incalculable. We're adding to it at the rate of over 5
million pounds per day. Generations will have to come and go
before the country recovers from the loss which it has
sustained in human beings and from the financial ruin and the
destruction of the means of production which are
taking place. Fundamentally, Britain is about to go bankrupt. You've seen some of the charts showing the scale of British foreign investment around
the world. Britain had been the financial hub of
modern capitalism. That era is coming to a close, and
Lansdowne is feeling it, because Britain is running out of money. Its public and private finances are
strained to the limit. Lansdowne even perceives, presciently, that
if the war continues, some of Britain's Allies may themselves implode. Looking over at Russia, and remember this
is written in the fall of 1916, he points out that already the
domestic situation is far from reassuring. There have been alarming disorders both at
Moscow and in Petrograd. If the war continues, Britain will change
in some permanent, fundamental way that it can never recover and so might the
rest of the world. These are Liberal politicians who are
seeing the world they grew up with disappearing before their eyes
with the continuation of this war. And they hope to bring it to an end. So look at the way the elements have
converged in the late summer and early fall of 1916.
[SOUND] The USA needs to bring the war to an end to keep it from engulfing them.
And it has leverage over the two sides. The Germans urgently want US mediation, and are, for their own reasons, interested
in getting a cessation of hostilities before the end
of the year. And the leadership of the British
government is clearly looking at all their options. So then. Why did the moment pass? For the USA, Wilson couldn't act quickly because he was consumed by his re-election
campaign. Just the timing of the American election
cycle. He ends up not making his peace move
until December 1916. By that time it's too late. In Germany, they're already moving towards
preparing their 1917 war plans. The military will have the upper hand.
And in Britain, the advocate of total war, David Lloyd George, had already out maneuvered his opponents in the British
Cabinet. Lloyd George's policies are going to drive
the British approach. By the end of 1916, when the Americans make their move, German domestic
politics, British domestic politics have already closed the
window of opportunity. Now I'm spotlighting this moment not
because I'm sure there was a panacea here. Maybe if you run a counter-factual
experiment, you say: Hmm, there are all sorts of reasons this might
not have worked out. Even if the Americans had mediated, it
might have failed. And there's no sure thing, especially when you're speculating
about might-have-beens. But it does seem to me there is a significant possibility that fruitful
negotiations might have happened, given the confluence of positions among
these critical countries and the alternative they were
looking at. As that windows closed, World War I
transitions to a new stage. In the winter of 1916 and 1917, the
direction of the war took a dramatic new turn. The leading powers have new people in
charge. In Britain, the new prime minister is David
Lloyd George, determined to lead the British people to
achieve that knockout blow he talked about to the press back in
September of 1916, when he'd been outmaneuvering his Liberal
rivals for the leadership. Lloyd George forms a national coalition
between Liberals and Conservatives, who will join together to
win the war at all costs. In France, their leadership too was swept
aside the new premier is this man: Georges
Clemenceau. Clemenceau was a formidable figure. He comes from what I classify as one of
the Liberal parties, in France it would be called the Radical
Party. Clemenceau has been a strong advocate of liberty, an opponent of the Church, a fierce spokesman for the
underdog. He's a tough fellow. His nickname is: The Tiger (Le Tigre). He'd spent some time in the United States
in his younger days, and also had been involved in more than one
duel. In Berlin, Bethmann-Hollweg's worst fears
come to pass. The German High Command decides it'll
adopt its approach to win the war. The key figure in the German General
Staff, its military master planner, is this man: Erich
von Ludendorff. Ludendorff becomes, in effect, the
military ruler of Germany. Bethmann-Hollweg will soon step down from
the chancellorship. Ludendorff will really run the day-to-day
management of the German Empire. As these new teams move into place in Britain, France, and Germany, Woodrow
Wilson, newly re-elected in November and by a very close margin,
does make his move to try to end the war. Wilson's peace message of December 1916
calls for a peace without victory. But the moment in which the British and
German leaderships would have been open to that kind of move
has passed. Now Wilson would have to use a lot of
leverage. He actually does pull the British lion's
tail a little bit by showing just how vulnerable the British
are to American financial pressure. But the American army isn't built up to
the point where the German High Command is very
frightened of it. Instead, the Germans decide that they're
going to undertake their gamble. What is their gamble? The German High Command's theory is this: Yes, the Americans may come into the war
if we wage all-out submarine warfare. But we'll starve the British and knock
them out of the war before America can slowly build
up its army, train its troops, get them to
France, and really make their weight felt on the
battlefield. And who knows whether the Americans will
be that tough an opponent anyway. They aren't used to war like we are.
The result, then, is a new phase in the First World War, one that'll push some of the countries
over the brink. In one case, in the Russian Empire, the
war pushes the government of Tsar Nicholas II
over the brink. They simply can't sustain the war effort
anymore. The Russian people rise up and overthrow
the monarchy. At first it's not clear what's going to
happen with Russia's role in the war. This protest, for example, features a
banner on the left that simply says: Feed the children of the
defenders of the motherland. This banner over here, on the right:
Increase payments to the soldiers' families, the defenders of
freedom and world peace. They just want a better government. So the Russian Empire, one of the last of
the old-style governments, Traditional-style governments, cracks. Another factor that helps create some
emotional momentum for war is the Germans,
anticipating that America might come in, send to the Mexican
government an offer that if the Mexicans will ally themselves with the Germans
against the Americans, why, the Germans will help
the Mexicans get back all that territory they
lost to the United States in the 1840s. Texas, California, and so on. [LAUGH] That German offer to the Mexican government was intercepted by British
intelligence, which then finds a way of leaking it without their fingerprints being on it into the American
press. You can imagine how the American public
reacted to that German move. Even so, it's not a sure thing that
America's going to come into the war. A lot still turns on what President Wilson
is going to ask. Wilson decides that America does need to
come in. Why? He is increasingly convinced that to end
the war in the right way offers the only hope to
really save civilization, that he needs to join with other countries
in doing what America can to make the world safe for a
democratic future, and that America won�t be able to have any
voice on the future shape of the world unless it
joins in the war to be able to be at the table and
contribute. So, Wilson decides that America has to
come in. He asks the Congress to declare war in
early April 1917, and the United States, for the first time
in its history, joins in a full-scale European conflict.
The final phase of World War I and its aftermath will be our topic next
week. I'll look forward to seeing you then.