Hi.
Welcome back. Make yourself comfortable. We spent a lot of time talking about World
War I as an event in world history. It is an event in world history also
because the way it changed the lives of communities in all these different
countries and the whole ideas of how you'd organize
society. Remember in an earlier presentation, I'd talked about one of the great questions of the whole 20th century will
be: How are we going to organize these modern
industrial societies? The First World War is supplying answers
to that question and all the societies that are
engaged in it. They're turning into total states. Let's talk a little bit more about what we
mean by the creation of total states. In history, war had often been devastating, but armies
would pass through, they'd have their pitched battles, now the combination of
wars going on year after year, often in the same location, combined
with hundreds of thousands, millions of chemical explosives being set off, is
creating a different feel of warfare. You pick up a little bit of that feel in a photograph like this one, taken of
British soldiers marching through the ruined
Belgian city of Ypres. You can also see, here, the way war artists were trying to comprehend this
reality. Take a look at this painting.
This is by a French artist. Explosions in the background, the earth
has been all churned up. Let's take a closer look at the foreground
of this painting. Those figures that you might not have made
out, these were soldiers. The soldiers are dehumanized; they're made
almost indistinguishable from the mud in which
they're crawling. Here's one dead body lying in a shell hole
here. These are men in a shell hole trying to
get out. You see these are French soldiers, they're
wearing their gas masks, one of their comrades is dying over here, another
one may be struggling to get out. One of the great horrors of some of the
soldiers is that they'd be caught in a shell hole full
of water, they couldn't climb out of it because the
mud would be too slippery and they'd find themselves drowning in the
water polluted by the bodies of their dead
comrades. Here's another picture of British
soldiers, I think this is in 1917, marching towards the
front. You can see what's happened to a piece of
land that had once been covered by forest. This painting, by the painter John Singer
Sargent, is of soldiers whose eyes have been burned by exposure to
poison gas. While they're waiting and hoping that
their eyes can heal, they're wearing these
blindfolds, and they're helping each other along in the rear
areas, find their way to a place of safety. What does it mean by the creation of
total states? It means that states are looking at
industrial organizations, like the Ford Motor
Company or Krupp Steel, and they're thinking that states themselves
need to turn into gigantic factories, factories of war in which they can control
all the necessary materials. That starts with money. The gold standard, a standardized
international form of exchange, goes out the window. Each country needs to print enough money
to buy what it needs. It needs to borrow that money mainly from
its own businesses, its own banks. And the security for those
loans? Well that's the security of their
government. So the governments are getting into the
business of controlling money, national money, to be sure that
they have enough. They also need to control the resources
they need. Look around the country. What might you need?
How about wheat? The government will take control of all
the farms. It'll take control of the price that's paid for wheat, take control of
bread, cotton. In other words, agriculture, production of
metals, everything has to be controlled by the
government to be sure that the war industries and the
soldiers will get what they need. You can't just do this on the free market.
Plant. What do I mean by plant?
I don't mean a leafy green thing. I mean the building of industrial plant.
You need to be sure you have enough factories to
build shells. So, for example, gee, I need a shell
casing built out of brass. Well, I have this factory over here. It's making tin cans that used to be
filled with canned beans. I'm going to take over that factory and
turn it from the building of tin cans into the building of
artillery shell casings. And if I don't have a plant that can make artillery shell casings, I'm going to
use my funds to build one. I'm going to create entirely new
factories. So the government has to both convert
existing factory capability and make it serve their needs, or they have to
create capabilities that don't exist. And manpower. These countries find themselves, by the
middle of the war, at a point they don't have enough people both to fill out all the armies and to provide all the
necessary workers they're going to need in the
factories and all the necessary farmers they're
going to need to grow the food. They can't rely on the private sector to
be sure that this is allocated right. The government has to really decide how
every adult labor-capable man and woman will best
serve their country. They'll tell the private sector how many
people can work in the factories and which
people have to go into the army. They'll tell them who can stay on the
farms and who cannot stay on the farms. The government has to take control of the
whole manpower supply of the country as one more
industrial resource. Now you begin to see what I mean by a
total state. And World War I becomes the great laboratory for the creation of total
states. Now, that also has a cultural and social
effect, as everything in society is being pulled together into these giant
efforts, of course that changes society. It changes popular culture. Take, for example, these sorts of war
posters. They're interesting, of course, as
propaganda. But they're also interesting at the values
that they think will touch the people who are seeing
this poster. This is a British war poster from 1915. You see the fellow on the bottom
right-hand side. He's obviously the person to whom this
question is being posed. You see the women? They're doing their
part. You even see the young boy, that member of
the boy scouts. He's doing his part, too, collecting some
of the materials that the soldier will need at
the fighting front. Everybody has their role to play. Or let's switch to Germany. By 1918, the German government can't let
private individuals decide who will have valuable
metals that the war effort might need, especially since
Germany is being blockaded from access to raw materials
around the world. So this poster is telling the German
population that if they have household items made out of
aluminum, copper, nickel, tin, these all need to be turned over to
the government. Indeed this notice right here is putting
everybody on notice that based on decree issued by the Kriegsrohstoffabteilung, that means the
war materials section of the government, as of the 26th of March 1918, all of it
has to be in view at the collection points where the government is going to get these valuable
metal items. Here's a poster from the United States
after it enters into the war. It's not a very subtle enlistment poster,
is it? You can see that the monster who's
kidnapped that very vulnerable, attractive young woman,
maybe she represents liberty, is being threatened by the monster wearing
the helmet of militarism and wielding the German word
for culture (Kultur). Mocking Germany's supposed civilized
ideals. In this society, the old divisions between
the working class and management, now turn into everybody
becoming servants of the state. If you think about those old political
groupings that we talked about, those five different kinds of political
approaches, Democratic Socialism like Revolutionary
Socialism prided itself on being internationalist. Solidarity of the working class across
borders. Well the war has shattered a lot of that
solidarity. The workers are increasingly caught up in
workings of the state. Although, it's true by 1917 and 1918
increasingly the workers feel like they're pawns of the states, not
partners in them. In some ways, the greatest effects of the
war are on the political right wing. Think about that other political faction
we talked about, National Tradition. The people who were holding out for old- fashioned values, they're being beaten
down by the war. This is a war in which the winners are going to be the modernizers, the
industrializers, the managers. Large landowners are finding
that their estates and their farmers are being confiscated or
deployed for the war effort.
What about Liberalism? Remember that one of the basic tenets of classical liberalism is keep the
government small. Well, if anything, the total state is the
antithesis of liberal ideals. And liberal parties do not fare well in
this war. Just take a look at what's happening in
some of the key countries. Russia, ruled by a party that stood for National
Tradition. That monarchy cannot survive the war. The war eventually cracks it, brings it
down, something else is going to take its place.
Britain, ruled by the Liberal party: By 1917, a faction of the Liberal party
ready for total war, led by Lloyd George, will rule in
combination with the Conservative Party, the National Conservatives, also devoted
to a big government effort that will win the
war. In Germany, a kind of peculiar empire with
its noble elite at the very top, its divided ruling structures, its very
polarized politics, is giving way to a total state in which the Kaiser is more and more
relinquishing rule to the military; the civilian chancellor is effectively being replaced by what
amounts to a military dictatorship to unify the country
for total war. And in the United States of America,
liberalism had still been very strong. City governments were getting more
powerful. State governments were getting more
powerful. But the federal government was a
relatively weak entity: small army, very little powers in the
domestic economy. During the war, the federal government has
to take on all sorts of new authorities over farm production, over
farm prices, over conscripting manpower and many other
things. World War I turns out to be a watershed in
America's domestic political life, in the whole shape of the
modern United States government. So now that we've talked about the way in which the war is changing the political
lives of these countries, let's go back to the
war itself and find out, not only what
happened, but why. Why the Allies won the war will be the
subject for my next talk with you. See you then.