Hi.
Welcome back. Let's talk about why the Allies won World
War I. Maybe the first question we need to ask
ourselves is: Well gee, is that even an interesting
question? If you'd looked at some standard books,
you'd just get the impression that as soon as the Americans come into the
war, why, it's all over. My argument is that: in early 1918, it was not at all clear that the Allies were
going to win the war. So, it actually is an interesting question
to examine why they did. I've emphasized all through this course
that when you think about these historical events, and you boil them down to why questions, you're often looking at
choices. And when you're looking at choices, you're
looking about the way people are trying to solve
problems. So let's look at some of the solutions
people are coming to as they examine their
situation in early 1918. Let's kind of review the situation in the
war as of early 1918. For Britain and France, 1917 had been an
another awful year. Okay, the Americans have come into the
war, but American soldiers are just being trained
to fight during 1917. Hardly any of them are engaging in any
combat in France. In 1917, this is a map, a military map, showing the
lines on the Western Front. The Germans are essentially moving into
defensive fortifications and letting the Allies just come at them
and beat themselves bloody, which they do. These French offensives, depicted right
here, fail so disastrously that portions of the French army actually mutinied
against their officers, causing profound problems in the French army itself that
took months to slowly put back together. Up in the North, the British and their
Imperial allies, Canadians, Australians, fighting
as hard as they can. They launch an offensive near Arras in
which more than 4,000 of their soldiers are hitting
the casualty lists every day, day in and day out, for weeks.
These lines shown here in red are still mainly lines
where the Germans are holding land in Northern
and Eastern France. They haven't budged much in more than
three years of fighting. In the East, the situation is even better
for the Germans. The Russian Revolution led during 1917
to a final collapse of a Russian government that would stay in
the war. The Communists take over in late 1917,
cutting whatever deal they can to get the war
over. That deal is called the Treaty of
Brest-Litovsk, signed in early 1918. So, at the end of 1917, here was the armistice line. By early 1918, the Germans and their
Austro-Hungarian allies are able to expand the area of control far
into what had been the Russian Empire. And the Germans and the Austrians have
occupied most of the Balkans down to about a line right about here, in the border lands of Greece, where a British and French
expeditionary force at Salonika is barely keeping a
battlefront alive. The British are driving up against the
Turks moving on Jerusalem, but that still seems like a
secondary battle field. The Italians are attacking the Austrians
in the Italian Alps, but, in 1917, the Italians suffer a
disastrous defeat, and the British and French have to throw
in more resources just to keep their Italian
allies in the war. In other words, it's not at all clear in
early 1918 that the war is going great for the
Allies. The Allied plans are, look: We're playing
this now for the long haul. We're blockading the Germans using our
naval forces; we're waiting for American forces to come into the field, use more
stuff from American industry. We'll do what we can in 1918, try to ride
things out. Maybe we'll be able to launch some war-winning offensives in 1919, fighting
on into 1920, and hoping their publics will support
them. And public opinion in the Allied countries is also showing
the strain: Open divisions are now apparent in political life in
Britain and in France, as the war sometimes seems like it will go
on forever. The Germans look at this situation and their strategy is dominated by General von
Ludendorff. Ludendorff is not a grand strategist. Ludendorff is a tactician; he wants
somehow to bring this to a head in the decisive
battle. Take all these German troops that have
been released by the collapse of resistance on the
Russian front, move them to the West and try to win a
knockout blow of his own. Concentrate all of his strength to try to win the war in the West
in 1918. He's yearning for that decisive battle. But if you pushed hard and looked at the
documents and try to figure out, okay if you won the
decisive battle, then what? What's Germany's overall strategy for how
it ends up bringing the war to a successful
conclusion? They don't really have answers to those
questions. What then does happen is the German plans do break things open and
really for the first time since 1914, the Western Front
returns to open warfare. This map shows the results from a series
of five offenses that the Germans launched beginning in March of
1918 and going on through July. They do break open some big holes in the
Allied lines. The British fall back but as their high command rallies them to Fight, with our backs to the wall, they
hold. The Germans are using up their best
troops, their best resources. They're exhausted.
The offensives run out of steam. They launch more offensives against the
French and get almost nothing from it. By July 1918, the Germans feel spent:
spent not just in formal military terms but psychologically spent. The way someone who's made what they think is their absolute maximum effort,
but then feels so spent that they're more exhausted
than if they hadn't made the effort at all. It's very interesting about German grand
strategy here. That, instead of standing pat and letting
the Allies just continue to beat themselves up against the German
lines, waiting for the Allies to reach the point of exhaustion, the German High Command, exhibiting this
particular mix of tactical arrogance and strategic political insecurity, wants
somehow to redeem everything by winning that decisive
battle. Yearning for that great gamble one more
time. Just like they had done with their gamble
on unrestricted submarine warfare in 1917, another gamble that didn't pay off. So the Germans, having started the year in
relatively strong shape, have now weakened themselves militarily and
also psychologically by a series of ruinous
offensives. And for the first time in the summer of 1918, the Americans are moving into
significant combat action. Some Americans pulled into the line here
to help blunt the German offensives. And then launching limited offensives of their own in this sector right here,
building towards a much larger offensive in an area called the Meuse-Argonne.
So as we step back and ask ourselves: Why did the war turn the way it
did in 1918? First big answer is: The Germans, from a
tactically advantageous position, made some military choices that didn't
turn out the way they hoped. But there are two other huge factors that
are also coming into play in 1918 on the
Allied side. The Allies are able to leverage the entire
world to their help. Think back to earlier maps we've looked at where you saw those trading routes, access
to raw materials, and ask yourselves: What are
the basic sources of support for the Germans and
their allies? They do have this enormous area in Central and Eastern Europe and part of
Southwest Asia that's under their rule. But the British, the French, and now the
United States of America, are able to call upon a much larger access to the
world's raw materials and people. The Allies basically control the seas.
The German submarine offensives of 1917 and again in 1918 fail, partly
because the Allies simply develop a convoy system, in which the
government tells all those cargo ships: No you won't be able to just go wherever
you'd like, whenever you'd like; you're going to have to bunch together
under our protection, so it'll be harder for those small submarines to find you in
the middle of the ocean. And if they do find you they'll find that you have some military protection along
with you, called convoys. Bottom line is the submarine offensives don't succeed. The British and their American allies
controlled the seas and the trade routes with them. The British, and also the French, also have
access to all sorts of help from their imperial
partners. They draw on a great many soldiers from
the White Dominions, like Canada, Australia, New Zealand, fighting in the hundreds of thousands alongside British
soldiers in France, in Turkey, in Palestine. But also they're calling on the Indian
army, that incredible source of imperial
military manpower. Here's a picture of just a few soldiers
from one unit of Indian cavalry serving on the
British side. And in addition, the British and French
are able to reach out to their colonies as sources
of labor. In fact, tens of thousands of Chinese and Indochinese laborers find
themselves living and working in France, providing support for
the Allied armies. Another hidden resource for the Allied
side is their increasing ability to leverage
scientific advancement. They can just pool a much larger set of
resources, finally to catch up with and beat the Germans in the
quality of their poison gas. They also develop highly sophisticated
intelligence technologies. This is not glamorous stuff about how you
steal a piece of paper from the enemy
statesman's suitcase. This is much more nitty-gritty stuff. Correlating information about the location
of artillery positions. Picking out material from intercepting
telegraph or radio signals. And also in the development of aircraft, aircraft used for reconnaissance, for
scouting missions. But in general, the allied aircraft in
both number and quality in 1918 is catching up and exceeding that
of the German side. Airpower is actually becoming a factor in
the Allies' favor. So if we step back, we look at the
military choices made in 1918, and we see how
significant those were. We look at the broader resources that the Allied side is
increasingly able to muster from around the world. But another really big factor that comes
into play in these late years of the war is the leadership and political resilience
of the Allied countries. Think about who the people are leading the
Allied powers. They're politicians.
But the politicians in charge on the Allied side, men like David Lloyd George, Georges Clemenceau,
Woodrow Wilson, like them or dislike them, these are
gifted politicians. About as good politicians as you can find
anywhere in the world. Extremely able to articulate national
objectives and rally people to a cause. Not only are these leaders articulate,
they are in some fundamental way representative.
They are, after all, products of a more or less democratic process.
Look at the leaders on the Allied side and contrast them with
counterparts in the Central Powers. Over here on the left, in France,
Clemenceau. In Britain, Lloyd George.
In the United States, Woodrow Wilson.
In Germany, Kaiser Wilhelm. The Kaiser doesn't make speeches in
public. In fact, his advisors are afraid to allow
the Kaiser to say much in public for fear of what
he'll say. In Austria, the aging emperor Franz Joseph
has passed away, and in 1918, the Habsburg Emperor is this
man, the Emperor Karl. But not a charismatic speechmaker, it's
just not the kinds of things emperors do. In Turkey, the Ottoman Empire is headed by
figurehead sultan. The real source of power is this man,
Enver Pasha, a Turkish nationalist leader and a gifted politician in a way, but again, not someone who's used to
rallying the Turkish people on the stump. In a conflict among total states, strained
to the absolute limits of what they can do, the resilience of these countries, their
ability to adapt under enormous pressure, turns out to be a key measure of
who will last out the war. By the late summer and fall of 1918, what surprises people, in fact, is how
suddenly the Central Powers, having lost their bid to
win the war, just seem to fall apart and
crack. Germany, Austria and then the Ottoman
Empire: internal revolution, quickly seeking
peace. In November 1918, it's all over. What we'll turn to next time, is what
happened then.