Hi, welcome back, make yourself
comfortable. Last time, I talked about communism as
this new global force that, was really convulsing all the inhabited countries of
the world by 1919 and 1920. Even in the United States. In Latin America.
Very compelling. But perhaps even more compelling was the political
movement that communism created. Anti-communism as a political force.
Let's spend some more time on that now. Communism is a political movement.
Very important, we understand that. It's important to think about anti-
communism as a political movement. Communism was so threatening, with its war
against established religion, its war against private property, its agenda to overthrow society so
thoroughly, creates a huge reaction, a popular reaction.
So anti-communism has a broad set of adherents and itself becomes a political
movement perhaps as powerful or maybe even more powerful that
communism itself. In other words, fear of communism became a powerful force of renewal for the
conservative movements. Fear of communism was as powerful a
rallying point as communism itself. But meanwhile as we see these battles of
Reds versus Whites, communists versus anti-communists.
Violent struggles. [LAUGH] What about poor old peaceful
liberalism? You'll remember in earlier presentations,
we really talked about the, the zenith of liberalism around
the 1860s. Liberalism is suffering some hard times in
this more violent era. But it does display some significant
strength. You'll notice that in virtually every one of these countries,
they all feel like they have to have a
constitution. They all feel like they have to at least
pay lip service to having a republic. The apparatus of liberalism is important
because the ideas of liberalism have gained a real grip on the
public imagination. That's a real strength. And indeed many of these countries we
looked at, the institutions of liberalism turn out to be resilient. The new German Republic survives the
Bolshevik revolutions in Southern Germany and then some of the right-wing military
reactions against those revolutions. It's shaky, battered, but it comes through
in the early to mid-1920s. But liberalism's great weakness in
comparison to the forces of violence is that liberalism itself is not
a political culture of violence. Fundamentally, liberalism is not about
having a big, strong government. It's about how to limit the power of
government. And, in time like these, that's a
liability. Let's step back a bit. You'll remember in an earlier
presentation, I talked about a 100 year struggle, starting in the
1890s. A struggle about how to organize modern
industrial society. I talked about modern politics giving rise to five different families of political
beliefs. We even labeled them. Just as a reminder, here is the basic
description I gave. Revolutionary Socialists, Democratic
Socialist, Liberals, National Conservatives, National Tradition
parties. I even gave you a check list of the kind
of positions that characterized each of these
ideologies. By the way if, rather than make you go
back and look at that presentation to see those checklists again, if you're interested, I'm not going to
recapitulate them all. Here they all are, if you'd like to just
review them, and see what it is each of these families of
beliefs stood for. What I've done here is I've tried to represent these five political families
in a way that very crudely attempts to
represent how influential they were in world
political life. Say, in 1900. And you'll see in 1900 I'm arguing, that
the three most influential movements, at that time, were these ones that broadly
speak more in the center. National Conservatives, Liberals, Democratic Socialists, with the Revolutionary Socialists kind of
being the extremists on one side and the National Tradition movements, like
represented by the Russian tsar for example, regarded worldwide more as
the extreme on the other side. Let's look at the way these movements
morphed in the aftermath of World War I. So take a look at this slide. This slide represents the top row, those sort of families of political ideas circa
1900. Notice that the three strongest are, kind
of crudely speaking, in the center. And this is meant to approximate their
influence in world political thinking.
It's an impressionistic portrait. Folks might disagree.
And it might vary country to country. But it does approximate the notion that
the national tradition, represented by the Russians, are kind of a smaller
outside influence here. Revolutionary socialism is seen as more
extreme and somewhat marginal, over here. The predominant movements in capturing public attention are mainly
these. Actually if I had to pick, probably the National Conservatives are the
strongest in 1900. Kind of the top down modernizers of
different stripes all over the world, from Japan to the
United States. Now take a look at the way this is changed
by oh, the mid-1920s. Start over here: National Tradition. These parties, in 1900, are monarchists,
believe in kings and emperors. By the mid-1920s, their global influence
is gone. What's taking their place as a new
movement, Fascism. And Fascism is a fascinating hybrid. It picks up the belief in the purity of the nation, defending national
traditions, all of that. It adds some of the top down modernizing
supporters of the National Conservatives, but among the National Conservatives,
people who grown intolerant of democracy and party
politics; and it really picks up a lot of its energy
from Revolutionary Socialists who now also want a strongly nationalist agenda.
Frankly, there is no better example for Fascism and the mixed DNA it represents,
then the most well know Fascist leader, Benito
Mussolini of Italy. If you look at Mussolini's life story, before World War I, Mussolini is over
here, he's a really a Revolutionary Socialist. He's in fact the editor of one of the
leading socialist newspapers in Italy. A man you could say of the Left. During World War I, Mussolini is a fervent
supporter of Italy in the war, and the liberal state shows its
weakness in the prosecution of the war. After the war, he abandons the socialist
movement to create a new movement, Fascism, that will take on the revolutionary ideals to reorganize a top-down modernizing
fascist state. Another significant change is over here on
the far left. Revolutionary Socialism, then seen as
somewhat smaller in relative influence, I depict here now as
Communism. Communism is organized internationally
into the Communist International, which has its first big congress in 1919. And you'll notice that where I saw these
three movements as more influential in 1900, by the mid-1920s, I see this new
family of political movements as all being roughly comparable in their
global influence. In the aftermath of the First World War,
the ideology of empire is more and more an
ideology that uses liberal ideals. It's no longer as fashionable to talk
about the struggle for markets and natural resources
among the liberal democracies. They more and more have to talk about, helping people acquire the ability to rule
themselves. They may not mean it. They may be hypocritical about it. But they feel more and more the necessity
to say so. And here Woodrow Wilson's rhetoric about
national self-determination was very important. The need to at least appear to support
that sort of ideal had a real effect on the way the colonial powers
had to go about their business. It also has a real effect on the
anti-imperialist movements, too. Let's think about that. To crudely simplify matters you could say
in the 1800s, anti-imperialisms was mostly
about: stop the foreigners.
Keep them from taking over. But by the end of the 1800s, the effort to stop the foreigners, or kick them right
out, has clearly failed. What anti-imperialism becomes is not so
much just a movement of getting the foreigners
out, Though that's an important part of it,
it actually is a movement that: take over the embryonic state the foreigners have created. If the foreigners have created a thing
called India, take that over. When the Dutch unify a lot of disparate
Southeast Asian principalities into one thing called the
Dutch East Indies, maybe that should be the new
unitary state, a state that eventually will be called
Indonesia. And the anti-imperialism now uses a lot of
the vocabulary from the foreigners themselves,
using Wilson's phrases about national self-determination right back at them.
Picking up the ideology of democratic revolutions against exclusive ruling
classes that don't admit the people, and even picking up some of the
revolutionary vocabulary of the Communist International as well, which is overtly
anti-imperialist in all of its goals. Let's zoom in for a moment on India. This is a photograph taken in 1920.
In this photograph, the man at the center, his name is Rabindranath Tagore.
Who is Tagore? Tagore is Bengali. He's perhaps the best know Indian literary
figure of the 20th century to that point. He was the first non-Westerner to win the Nobel Prize for
literature in 1913. A renowned poet, playwright, short story writer, novelist, also a commentator on
politics. Tagore emphasized the spiritual quality of
Indian culture, or Bengali culture, to the world. He focused on rural India, on the simple
values and traditions of rural India, the ideal of
the ashram. Let's take a look at the man sitting to
the left of Tagore, here in this picture from 1920: Mohandas K. Gandhi.
Perhaps better known as Mahatma Gandhi. This is, of course, not the stereotypical
picture of Gandhi you're used to seeing. This captures Gandhi in 1920. Think about who Gandhi is. Gandhi is a man trained as a British
lawyer. Three piece suits.
All the rest of it. The very picture of an Edwardian
gentleman. He practices law among the Indian
expatriates in South Africa, becomes a dedicated
opponent to British discrimination against Indians
and eventually to British rule in India
itself. Believes the Indians need to empower
themselves. But his notion of anti-imperialism is a fusion of both Western ideas and Indian
ideas. He very much believes there ought to be a
nation state called India, that it ought to be organized along fairly
traditional Western liberal lines, civic lines, but that the state needs to be infused
with some of the spiritual qualities that many associate with a writer like
Tagore, sitting next to him. You see, too, that Gandhi has discarded
the Edwardian attire and has consciously adopted a simple dress, more evocative of
Indian traditions than of British ones. Gandhi is a leading figure in the Indian
National Congress, an effort to ally all the different
kinds of political and ethnic movements in India under one civic structure
that would take the place of British rule. In the 19 teens, the Indian National
Congress would have been happy to have the Dominion
status that the White Dominions had, like Canada, Australia, South Africa, New
Zealand. But of course, that would have required
the British to treat people like Gandhi as if
they were white rulers, and grant them the same
kind of autonomy they were willing to grant the
Australians. Now, that would have been a difficult
problem. India is vastly larger than those other
places. There are all kinds of ethnic and communal
differences that the British and the Indians themselves
would be struggling to reconcile. But by the 1920s, increasingly, the moment
at which the British could have managed this problem by granting
dominion status to India is passing, and the Indians are beginning to move more
and more to the issue of: Should they just ask for
complete independence? But let's circle back again to the basic
theme of this presentation. Communism versus anti-communism as kind of the basic fault
line of the new politics of the 1920s. Let me give you some illustrations of
this. And I want to draw my illustrations from
places that were not directly scarred by the First
World War. This is the front page of the New York
Times. The date, you can see at the top, October
17th, 1919. You look at the paper, the lead story over here on the right,
this is a story about battles over the ratification of the treaty for the League
of Nations, arguments in the Senate. But the sub-headline is already a headline
right here about the Russian Revolution, report British capture
Kronstadt, fleet shells Russian port, Reds leaving
Petrograd. By this way, this news turned out be
premature. Troops mutinous and advancing army of
Yudenitch only 16 miles from city. Red retreat in Siberia. More stuff here about the League of
Nations fight, but already the Russian Civil War is
increasingly in the foreground. Look at this headline right here. Same page. All nations wishing peace should oppose
Reds, say Allies in their note, urging a general boycott of
the new Soviet government. But, that's the foreign news. Let's look at the domestic news in the New
York Times that day. Story after story. How about this story right here to the
left. 50,000 aliens here spread radicalism. Government official tells of wide
agitation on Bolshevist lines. Backed by a rabid press. Subversive propaganda pushed among workers
by foreign language papers. Of course, this is the New York Times. This is not some crazy right-wing screed. Thousands of aliens are in this country
agitating for the confiscation of property and the overthrow
of the American system of constitutional government is the lead
of that story, okay. Let's move one more to the left. Seized documents link Gary leaders with
Russian Reds. Gary leaders, that's referring to the
leaders of a strike going on in Gary, Indiana, a suburb
of Chicago. Army raids have uncovered much evidence
that incriminates. Many arrests forecast. Some of the strike leaders said to have
had credentials to Red conclaves, men will be
deported, et cetera. Let's move one more story to the left. Labor threatens conference bolt. This, these are problems between
management and labor, in which, the story points out, the national
industrial conference is facing a crisis. Presentation of resolution declaring the
right of wage earners to collective bargaining. In other words, another symptom of large
scale labor unrest. And then, if you go over to this story, radical strikers shoot and stab
working piermen. One with an I.W.W. card. That was the most radical of the unions trying to organize across all industries
in the 19-teens. Strikers slow to return.
Violence angers steamship men, who ask mayor for police protection.
Again, that's just October 17th, 1919. You can just see how the issues of
communism versus anti-communism are viscerally defining the news agenda and
the politics of the United States. If we were to zoom over and take a good
look at Spain, and Barcelona. 1919, a lot of hardship there, in the
aftermath of the war. Spain had been neutral during the war,
hadn't taken part. But the hardship affects Spanish industry,
affects Barcelona. In 1919, all the workers, public and
private in Barcelona, are being called out on a general strike to try to
bring down the government, in order to get the release of some of their union leaders who
had been imprisoned. The general strike in Barcelona is
successful. The Spanish government is forced to give
way. The strikers increasingly organizing into
revolutionary militant groups, many of them in uniform.
Alright, but in 1923, the anti-communist, the anti-revolutionary reaction.
The Spanish government in effect becomes a military dictatorship,
led by a man Primo de Rivera. Communism versus anti-communism in a
different form, but you see the dynamic there too. Now let's spin the globe. Go half way around the world to China. Let's see how this kind of dynamic might
be playing out there. Just if we were to zero in on the city of
Shanghai in 1925, 1927.
What happens in 1925? Anti-foreign unrest.
Imperial policemen fire into a crowd. Chinese are killed. Chinese angry are boycotting Western goods
all over China. It helps spur Chinese nationalist
reaction. The new Republic of China, from a
relatively small area of control in the South, begins marching northward. The different warlord armies in anarchic
China are giving way before it, and are lining up with the
new republic. And finally, by early 1927, this Republic
of China, it reaches the Yangtze Valley. It establishes control in Shanghai itself,
right here. What then happens in 1927?
The Republic of China had been in alliance between various nationalist movements and the
Chinese communists. The Chinese Communist Party, founded in
Shanghai in 1921, had joined forces with other
Chinese. One of the key military leaders of the Republic of China is this man, Chiang
Kai-Shek. Charismatic, young military leader,
trained in Moscow, deeply influenced by the Soviet communist
example. But what happens when Chiang and his
forces take control in Shanghai? In 1927, Chiang organizes the
non-communist part of the republic into a civil war against the communist
elements, determined to destroy them. There is a purge of the communists in the
republic. Hundreds of people are killed and a civil war begins between the Nationalists and
the Communists within China that will continue off and on for
more than 20 years. Communism versus anti-communism, again
becomes a defining fault line in the building of a new Chinese
state. In the next presentation, we'll talk about
the way some of the questioning of established ideas works
itself out, in society at large. See you then.