[BLANK_AUDIO] Hi, welcome back. This week, we're going to talk about the
world crisis of the 1930s. It starts with a terrific shock to modern
capitalism and collective security. You know, when you're at a loss to figure out what's going on some place around the
world, starting with analyzing guns and money is
a pretty [LAUGH] good rough and ready place
to look. Here let's reverse the order and start with money and then go to guns. Modern capitalism, we've talked about it
in this Course, is really a creature of the late
1800s. Standardized money built around the gold
standard, modern corporations. Let's get into the gold standard issue. Now, I hope for some of you when I talk
about the gold standard, your brain is telling
you it’s time to take a nap. But, it's actually kind of interesting, if
you'll take a minute on this. Because you all kind of know that demand,
and demand is just a fancy word for how much we can
buy, but the amount of stuff people can buy is
linked somehow to economic growth. More people are buying stuff, the more
they're making stuff, all that. I know for those of you who have taken
advanced economics this may seem a little too basic, but there is a
little bit of a payoff here. The amount of demand is clearly linked, to
the amount of money available. And that money can be supplied, you know, by private sector, public sector, but there is some relationship
between how much stuff people can buy and the
amount of money that's available. So, if you have a gold standard system, that means the amount of gold is somehow
linked to the amount of money available. If the amount of gold is fixed, demand
somehow becomes anchored by that. Now the good part of that is that means
the money is hard, it feels really stable, very stable
value, very stable exchange rates. The bad side of that is if you're
increasing production a lot then demand has trouble keeping pace unless people are
digging a lot more gold out of the ground. Now, I've simplified it, because people are creating paper
instruments to try to multiply the value of gold in different
ways. More technically the gold standard was
called the gold exchange standard. There is both gold and paper. But, it is useful to kind of think about It, as a start in these, fairly simple
ways. Because one of the arguments about the
causes of the Great Depression of the late 20s and early 1930s, is that these,
this gold standard wasn't just an anchor. They were, as the economic historian Barry Eichengreen famously put it, golden
fetters. Chaining the world economy, keeping it
from getting economic growth. Here are the countries on the gold standard during the period we are looking
at. If you kind of think about what are the
engines of the world economy? Britain is in gold in 1929.
So is the United States, France, Germany. China, by the way, still uses silver, its
traditional mineral of value, as the basis for its
monetary system. So everybody is using gold. Now, one of the things about the gold
standard is: Since the amount of money you have is based on the
amount of gold, what happens if all the gold is running
out your country? What are you supposed to do as your people are buying more stuff than they're
bringing in? Well, if your people are buying more stuff
than they're bringing in, you've got to attract more gold to your country,
so you hike up interest rates. So that if someone puts more money in your
country they earn more from doing that. But hiking up interest rates, as you know,
makes it harder for people to buy stuff, but it does
attract more gold. So that's the way the system was supposed
to rectify itself: like, you're buying too much.
We'll hike up interest rates. We'll attract more gold. You'll buy less stuff.
You'll get back in balance. That's kind of the theory of it. The point for our purposes is by the late
1920s most of the key countries are back on gold after the
disruption of the First World War. The big economies though are not in such
terrific shape. They really are, in a way, still recovering
from the First World War.
Germany is rebuilding its economy. There are intense arguments over the
reparations the Germans are being asked to pay to make good for the damage the Germans
caused in places like France. They're supposed to pay huge amounts of
money. Frankly, as the Germans had asked the French to do after the Franco-Prussian
War. The Germans bitterly resist, and then one
way of resisting is, well, we'll just print a bunch of money and make
our money worthless. They go into a period of hyperinflation,
where their money becomes worthless. Germany is an economic mess in the early
20s. But here we are, late 1920s, remember my
last talk, people are trying to patch things up and get things back
together again, partly with U.S. credit. Mid to late 1920s, Germany has got a new
currency; it's being backed a lot by U.S. loans.
So crudely put: what's happening is a kind of hydraulic system in which U.S. loans,
private loans go to, say, the Germans.
Who then can use that to pay reparations money to the British
and the French or otherwise pay back loans from them. Then the British and the French can use
that money to pay back the huge loans they still owe the
United States from World War I, when the United States was
doing so much to finance the war, especially during about
the last year and a half. So that's kind of the hydraulic loop that is sustaining this economic recovery and
the health of a financial system that's
spreading money out to economies in Eastern Europe,
for example, or South America for a few years during
the 1920s. But they're all still struggling. The German economy is just barely back on
its feet. The British economy has re-stabilized its
currency, but it's struggling with very significant
labor unrest in the mid-1920s, trying to motor up again. The United States had a boon during World War I, when it was supplying all
this stuff to the Allied powers. Right after the war ended, the U.S. had a
sharp recession that triggered a lot of that labor-management disputes that
you were reading about in years like 1919. Economic times were really hard in 1919,
1920. U.S. is coming out of that. Now, actually, U.S. agriculture, which is
still a big part of the economy in the 1920s, is not really coming out of it very well. U.S. agriculture is limping along all
through the 1920s. But U.S. industry is going, going, going.
People are loaning and borrowing a lot of money. One reason is because, all of a sudden,
industry has access to all kinds of new money. Why? There's a thing called a stock market. Now, public investment in stocks is a
pretty new thing. In a way, it's another thing that World
War I taught people to do. All through World War I, the governments
went around asking their publics to loan them
money. The publics loaned them money to fight the
war in the form of War Bonds. But after the war was over people had gotten
used to, for the first time really on a mass scale,
millions of people buying securities that they would hold instead of just cash in the bank. Now here are these stocks, securities in
corporations. Corporations that are rocketing along,
changing value year to year, like in radio. People were throwing money into that stock
market. The companies with all that money were
growing fast. Their stock values are rising.
People investing more. People borrowing to invest more. So the Americans look like they're having
a lot of economic growth, alongside their sputtering agricultural
economy, but a lot of this is becoming an
investment bubble. The investment bubble in the United States
pops in 1929. Here is a basic chart showing you what
happened in the October crash. Many of you have already seen images like this, newspaper headline from October
1929, speaks for itself. Lines of people gathered outside of a
bank. Of course, banks mostly put their money out on the
streets to borrowers. People are worried about whether the banks
are still safe. They're crowding around to try to get
their money out. But here's one of the main points I
want to make. The 1929 crash did not cause the Great
Depression. The Great Depression happens in a couple
of stages. Economies are already sputtering in ‘27 and
’28; it's masked a little bit by some of the bubble. Then the bubble pops in 1929. Economies reset 1929, 1930; they go down,
but they're still rocking along a little bit, even bumping up a little bit
in 1930. Take a look at this chart. You can see how in the beginning of 1930
stocks are beginning to come back up again, though they're beginning to
slump later in the year. It's important to think of the Great
Depression as something that happens in two main
stages. First, there is the financial crisis in
the United States in 1929, but then as folks think they're recovering, there is another financial
panic. But this one originates in Europe, and it's
in 1931. And it's the second panic and the response to that coming on top of the first, that's what sends it over the
cliff. And that panic has its roots in European
politics as much as in general economics. So in a way, if we're looking at the question: Why the worldwide Great
Depression? Yes, the 1929 crash figures in that. But what we really want to look at is: What choices did the people make after the
bubble popped in October 1929 in the United
States? First, they made choices about
liquidation. What liquidation meant in 1930 is kind of
like the word we use today: deleveraging. It meant clear up your debts by selling
stuff and getting the cash. Put yourself back into cash. That was the conventional wisdom of the
day. But, if the conventional wisdom of the day
is you need to get out of the stock market, get back into
cash, you're going to stop buying stuff. And you're going to hold onto your money. Those political choices are all over the
place. Governments balancing the books. Individuals balancing the books. Demand is going down, both public and
private. Now economic historians today argue about
what government should have done to offset that declining
demand. Some would say, there should have been a lot of public
spending. But, our thinking wasn't modern enough
then for that. And besides, people were afraid to spend
more money because they thought that would undermine the value of their
currency and the gold standard. The other argument is you could pump more
private money in. But central banks back then thought that
they needed to adopt a more careful policy about printing money because otherwise the gold would run
away to places where people weren't printing
paper money. Then they'd have to raise interest rates
to pull the gold back. Which would curb their domestic demand. So the answer is that you don't expand your
money supply in this gold standard system. Gold standard again. Then the argument would be, though, well,
yes, but was that a structural problem? Did it have to be that way or could you've managed that problem through cooperatively resetting your exchange standards in
relation to gold, so that several countries could,
working together, have increased their money supply without playing beggar
thy neighbor against each other? But then that would require international
cooperation. But what that implies is: the problem here is not just structural.
You have a gold standard. If only we didn't have the gold standard,
no problem. The problem is significantly political. The political inability to cooperate in
solving the problem, whether through monetary policies or trade
policies or other things. So, in addition to the domestic politics of
liquidation, there's another big factor we need to look
at: the international politics surrounding debt and trade. Remember that hydraulic chain that I
talked about, U.S. loans to Germany, Germany then paying back money to
the British and the French. But after the financial crisis of 1929,
the U.S. isn't loaning so much money to the Germans or
other Europeans. So the Germans have less money, therefore
the British and French have less, and so on. So how did the British, French, Germans
work out this financial challenge they face in 1930, 1931,
especially since their loans are helping to hold up banks in a lot of
Eastern Europe too, like Austria, Hungary? There the politics of the relationships,
especially between the French and the Germans, poison the prospects for
financial cooperation, as well. The French can't really help out the
Germans, because the Germans are trying to beat the French out of having to
pay any more reparations. They can't come to a settlement of this
issue. The result is no financial cooperation to
solve these problems. The political causes of these
disagreements freeze up financial markets in Western
Europe. The result being, then, when there's a run
on an Austrian bank in 1931, the Austrian
bank goes belly up. And then when Austrian banks go belly up,
no one knows where it'll stop. Now you have a huge financial crisis in
Europe. The result is this: 1931 - Great Britain announces suspension
of the gold standard. The country that's the anchor of the gold
standard, more than any other in the whole world,
the anchor indeed of a commitment even to free
trade, has gone off the gold standard. We're just going to print our own money,
guys, and we'll work out how to exchange it. So remember this chart about the Dow Jones
industrial average. Remember that in the middle of 1930, it's
gone down to about here? But that's actually about the level it was
even in October of 1928, not so terrible. But by the end of 1932, the Dow Jones
Industrial Average will be about here. That's what's happening when the other
shoe drops in 1931 and the aftermath. So modern capitalism is in huge trouble. Let's see what's happening with the
systems for collective security. The early 1930s don't make a whole lot of sense, unless you understand that the
reactions to World War I are still reverberating,
especially in countries like Britain, France, and
United States. A deepening horror and revulsion about
what happened in the trenches. Culturally, nothing better symbolizes this
trend than the worldwide acclaim for this book, by a
German named Erich Maria Remarque.
Here's Mr. Remarque. And this is his book. The cover you're seeing is the first
English edition of All Quiet on the Western Front, the
story of a young, innocent German patriot, who volunteers for service, chronicling his war
experiences. It really is a moving novel and
authentically told. It gripped a huge worldwide audience
with its powerful message about hypocrisies of
patriotic rhetoric, the futility of the war, the essential solidarity of the fighting
men on both sides, who were really common
victims. The book was made into a movie. The movie won the Academy Award for best
picture of the year in 1930, I think. And by the way still has some of the most
realistic cinematic images of World War I you can
find on film because back then they were able to film
using veterans and a lot of people who actually remembered
what stuff looked like. One interesting footnote: the book is not
quite as popular in Germany as it is elsewhere. It's competing with other books by German
veterans like Ernst Jünger, who wrote books like Storm of Steel, actually celebrating the wartime
experience as a period of personal trial, heroism,
comradeship. Another challenge confronting the great
powers like Britain and France in the early 1930s was a sense of
imperial weariness. Finances were tight. The empires were not hugely profitable; if anything, they were probably a net financial
burden. So instead of an issue of expanding their
empires, they're looking more at how to beat a slow and dignified
defensive retreat. For instance, this is an image from the
roundtable conference between the British government
and representatives of political factions in India. This particular roundtable conference,
one of a series, was held in London in 1931. You can probably make out the distinctive
figure of Mahatma Gandhi, seated at the table
here. One of the things I liked about this
Photograph: You see how almost everyone in the room is looking up at the
photographer, but Gandhi doesn't bother. What are they discussing? They're discussing the terms of Indian
self-government. This is a British Labour government that's
inclined to try to retreat, at least to some degree, from the
burdens of empire. They're talking to Indians about: If we begin to retreat and give you self-government, what will that self-government look like? The British are trying to negotiate an
arrangement and what powers Britain retains, what powers
the Indians have. And if the Indians have power, who are the
Indians? Who will rule? The princes and their domains? The Indian National Congress? Hindu nationalist movements, Muslim
nationalist movements? And so on. Even the issue of how the lower castes of
Hindu society, the so called untouchables, represented
here by a man named Ambedkar, even those issues are coming up. Would the
untouchables have a right to vote in the new India with its self-government? With these issues on the table, the roundtable
conference ends in failure. Britain can't yet find a way to work its way out
of these burdens. In the meantime, the Indian National
Congress and its allies decide that their agenda is going to
become one of complete independence. Here's the tricolor flag actually that
India arrives at as it's national symbol in 1930 and
1931. The emblem in the foreground is actually a symbolized representation of the
spinning wheel: homemade textiles, instead of clothes made
in the mills of British Manchester. Meanwhile, do you remember how the agenda
of disarmament had been kind of the issue
the League of Nations was really working on? There had been some important naval
disarmament in the 1920s, and I told you that late in the 1920s they're working
on how to reduce armies. Turns out to be much harder. In fact, so hard that by the beginning of the 1930s, the disarmament agenda is
falling apart. There's going to be a final world
disarmament conference in 1933. It'll come to a complete failure. And, as if that were not enough, there are
clear crises and challenges to collective security taking place in
the Far East, led by Japan. I'll come back to those next time. See you then.