[BLANK_AUDIO] Hi, welcome back.
In this presentation, I'm going to focus on the years 1931 through 1933, pivotal
second phase in the full onset of the world crisis that
will dominate the decade. We're going to focus really on two
countries first of all. First of all on Japan.
Japan's situation is very interesting in the early 1930s.
The rising economic calamities are hitting Japan pretty hard.
It's sharpening a dispute between two basic factions.
With Japan's enormous modernization, there's a lot of appeal from people who
are arguing for liberal ideals at home with a lot of international economic and
political cooperation. Now, what that means is, Japan has to work
with and depend on others, depend on others for markets,
for raw materials, for finance; it also means that Japan is interacting a
lot with their cultures, their traditions. But on the other hand, there's a national
conservative faction in Japan that emphasizes the preservation of
Japanese nationalism and the purity of Japanese
traditions. They're more nationalist, but that means Japan must be economically
and politically independent. Must not be vulnerable to pressure from
Britain, from the United States. Japan needs an empire of its own. It needs to capture its own markets.
Capture its own access to raw materials. It needs to reject the culture and
dominance from outside foreigners in the West.
These two sets of beliefs are pretty stalemated in Japanese politics through
the 1910s and the 1920s. If anything, maybe the liberal internationalists
have a bit of the upper hand. But you can imagine whom the Great Depression is going to help in this
argument. It's going to look like modern capitalism,
the reliance on global trade, global finance,
has failed. Let me introduce you to one of those
Japanese nationalists. This is a photograph of a colonel, Colonel
Ishiwara, Ishiwara Kanji. In Japanese, the family name is given
first. Colonel Ishiwara believed that Japan
needed to become entirely independent, self-reliant, having access to its own
natural resources under its own control. It needs to grab an empire using the industrial resources of Manchuria on the
Chinese mainland. Then using that, he actually believes
empowered Japan should join with China and form a pan-Asian
alliance of new strong powers that might, for example,
take on Soviet communists to the north. And expand in that way, in Asian
solidarity. That's his particular vision. He has a dynamic, Japanese-centered answer
to the dilemmas that face his country. The people in charge, from his point of
view, they're paralyzed, paralyzed by democratic politics. They
can't take the firm and determined action that's
needed. So he and his young colleagues figure out
ways to force, to shame, their government into
doing what it needs to do. The new Chinese republic of Chiang
Kai-shek is challenging Japan's sphere of influence, its informal control over
some of the resources in Manchuria, and Japan has some forces stationed in Manchuria to help look after its
interests. So these colonels also imagine, if we can engineer an incident, that'll create a
confrontation between Japan and this Chinese Republic. It'll make it clear who's the strong
partner in this future relationship. So imagine this. Here's what happens. These young colonels engineer an incident
without the permission of their army bosses to blow up a train, blow
up a section of railroad track, which they will
then claim has been the work of the Chinese, and they'll
demand that Japan initiate a military reaction in response
to this Chinese provocation. These Japanese officers do this, they
engineer this, and the Japanese government is then faced
with the dilemma: Do we expose these officers and
punish them? Well, that's politically embarrassing and
will get us in trouble with the right wing. Or do we just stand up for Japanese patriotism and kind of conceal
the problem? And that's the choice that they make. In a
way, for them the easiest answer is to ignore
the insubordination of these officers and in fact go ahead and
have the incident that the officers have
engineered and cover it up. Indeed the officers will be promoted. Ishiwara will become an even more powerful
figure in the Japanese military. So in 1931, the Japanese army effectively
annexes Manchuria and creates the dependent state Manchukuo. It then installs, as the Chinese ruler of this puppet state, the heir to the Qing
Dynasty: the Manchu emperor Puyi, who presumably
will be the ally of Japan's new China that it's
hoping to create. Of course, as you can see from the point of view of a United States cartoonist,
Japan's actions have blown through the pretenses of the whole
international system that's built up: the Nine Power Treaty signed in
Washington, that guaranteed the territorial integrity
of China; a pact signed by an American Secretary of
State in which countries were swearing to avoid
aggressive war; the covenant of the League of Nations;
World Court; et cetera, et cetera. The Japanese position in Manchuria, the
growing international outcry about it, debates in the League of
Nations, the Japanese government is torn about what
to do. Again, the nationalist try to free the
paralysis of the Japanese government by making a
bold move. They're going to attack Western influence
in Tokyo right at the heart, seizing on the visit of the American film
actor Charlie Chaplin, they hope to kill both
Chaplin and Japan's prime minister when the two of them
get together. Here's the prime minister, Inukai Tsuyoshi,
who's confronted by nearly a dozen young
officers. They shoot him to death. They don't get Chaplin because he's away with others watching a Sumo wrestling
match. The so-called May 15th Incident: May 15th,
1932 was when these young officers killed the prime minister.
The officers are dealt with lightly. This is a clear turning point in which it
becomes clear to the Japanese civilian politicians that no one has the ability to
stand up to the military provocateurs. No one can stand up to the army. Japan more and more is moving towards a military dictatorship, with civilian
rulers on top. So now, let's turn to the case of Germany. Germany also has its own political
struggle intensified by the impact of the Depression, which hits Germany
very, very hard. The return of mass unemployment. This is evident in German election results
from the beginning of the 1930s. Look at this result for July 1932. You can see how well the extremist parties
are doing. The Nazis get the largest vote they will
ever get in a free election: 38%. But look at the communist party over here
with 15%. The more liberal, center parties over here
with only 12%. The National Conservatives, over here, a
mere 6%. Democratic socialists and communists: 37%. Nazis: 38%. There's a vivid picture right there for
you of the state of German politics during the Great
Depression: between socialism, communism, Nazism. That kind of polarized electorate
cannot form a stable government. The president of Germany is a figurehead:
Paul von Hindenburg, a venerable old general from
the First War. They're struggling to figure out who will
run the country. The hold another series of federal
elections. Here are the results: Interestingly, the share of the Nazi vote
has gone down from 38 to 33. Communists are now slightly up.
The others are pretty well stable. National conservatives doing a little bit
better. If anything, the Nazis are weakening, but
some of the national conservatives who are helping Hindenburg
think: We can't form a stable government with this kind of result unless
we appeal to the center and the left; we're not going to
do that. So they think perhaps we ought to give the Nazis
the chance to run the government. We can probably manage them anyway. They're a not very competent group of hooligans led by this ridiculous fellow,
Hitler. So, those politicians, General Schleicher,
Franz von Papen are some of the names among them, make an absolutely crucial decision
in January 1933 to give Hitler a chance at running the German Republic.
He becomes chancellor. The German Republic will soon be no more. In fact, a year and a half later one of
the generals who put Hitler in power,
Schleicher, also will be no more. Nazi gunmen will show up at his doorstop
and shoot him down. Japan and Germany have both chosen to move
into a new world of dictatorship and imperial
ambition. Meanwhile, capitalism itself and
collective security are going down the tubes. Let's take a look at the situation.
World trade begins to completely collapse. In 1932, Britain abandons free trade. Britain had been the very symbol of it.
Remember those cartoons I showed you in earlier
presentation, the tug of war between the people who wanted imperial
preferences, a trade wall around the empire, and the supporters of
free trade. Well, imperial preference finally wins out in
the desperate days of 1932. Well, if Britain is not going to have free
trade, you can imagine what's happening everywhere else
in the world as demand plummets. The gold standard goes away. There had been standardized money, easy
stable exchange rights, no more. Let's just take a look at the contrast. Here are the gold standard countries
colored in kind of of a yellow, kind of sort of like gold, in
1929. You look at that map in 1929, let's see
what that map looks like in 1933. [LAUGH] It's shrunk pretty remarkably
because Britain and the British Empire are now out
of it. Well, Poland and France and the United
States at least are still in it. And Holland. And then by 1934, the United
States is off the gold standard, too. France and its ally Poland are about the
last folks left in in the whole world. No one was hit harder by the declines in world trade than the people who were
supplying commodities to fuel the industries of the
most advanced countries. So look at what's happening in commodity
exports from people selling raw materials to the
manufacturers. Huge declines among these countries
colored in; the lowest level of decline is 30 to 50%. Look at the situation in China, which is
down 70 to 80%, or the situation in India, which
is down 60 to 70%. You can see, too, how hard the economic crisis then hits practically all the
countries of Latin America, whose economic development had depended on
supply of raw materials and commodities. Was all of this simply inevitable, the
inexorable product of economic forces? Not necessarily. Could international cooperation have saved
the day? Could the countries have gotten together
and decided on some new arrangements, either to
rehabilitate the gold standard, to rehabilitate international trade, to
figure out some way to loan each other money to work together to
get afloat? Maybe it was too late. There was a try at
it: an international conference held in London in 1933. The new American President, Franklin
Roosevelt, in effect torpedoed the conference almost
right away. He had decided the United States needed to embark on its own path of national
reconstruction. He felt it was hopeless to try to coordinate that with countries like
Britain, France, and Germany and that the United States had to cut itself loose from those dead weights and try to
recover on its own. The London Economic Conference collapses
in failure: 1933. The effects aren't hard to make out. Here's a chart just giving you a lot of
numbers on the declines in industrial production,
on the increases in unemployment. Here's a similar chart that shows you the
picture in the United States. You can see how bad the year 1932 is in unemployment;
that's the year Franklin Roosevelt was elected President.
But it's still awfully bad in 1934. One of the things that happens in the
United States, these green arrows show the
migration of laborers, including many African-Americans from the
areas that are particularly hard hit: the
agricultural South, these wheat growing areas that have
become a dust bowl in the southern Midwest, where many people are fleeing to opportunities
in California. The political results also are pretty
evident. You can almost see it by this map. In country after country, dictatorships
take charge. Indeed, if you look at the Rhine River, right here, in all
of Europe east of the Rhine only one real democracy is left: Czechoslovakia.
Collective security sputters and fails. We talked about the Far Eastern crisis. Japan had confronted the League of
Nations. What is the League of Nations going to do? Now, Manchuria itself might seem like a
far away issue. But everyone sort of understood it as the
test case. Other than Japan, the two major power in East Asia were Great Britain and the
United States. Britain and the United States couldn't
agree on what to do except that both of them agreed that any kind of military
counteraction to Japan was just out of the question under
the circumstances. The United States decides that it will, ostentatiously, not recognize what Japan
has done. It will disapprove of it. The British shrugged their shoulders. Japan takes offense that the League of Nations has criticized it for its
behavior. It resigns from the League of Nations
altogether. The disarmament conference that's held in
1933 as one last effort to try to regulate, limit, reduce armies in
Europe, also comes to not. Hitler, of course, takes offense at the
idea of such a disarmament conference, and he uses that as his excuse to have
Germany walk out of the League of Nations. The Italian Empire is on the march. Mussolini had already been expanding
Italy's Mediterranean empire here in Libya, as you can see from this
map. But in the mid-1930s, he decides to march
into Ethiopia, historically independent, where Italy had
suffered a humiliating defeat from the Ethiopians in 1896 that I talked about in
an earlier presentation. Mussolini believes he is going to avenge
that defeat. Mercilessly using aircraft and all the
technology of modern warfare against the Ethiopians, he's able
to subdue them. The League of Nations threatens an oil
embargo, threatens other actions. It's ineffectual. By the end of the Ethiopian crisis in 1935, it's clear that collective security
and the League of Nations have utterly failed. Looking back at Europe, any country in
Eastern Europe watching these events would no longer put their faith in
the League of Nations. They look at the threat they feel from the growing military power of the Soviet
Union. They're anxious and uneasy, looking for
allies, looking perhaps to the Germans, or to the French to somehow offer them
some measure of security. In other words, by the mid-1930s, there are only three
solutions left to how to obtain security in the modern world that's taking shape:
war, imperialism, or diplomacy. And you can imagine how credible the
diplomatic options were looking by 1936. So we look back over this period of world crisis, modern capitalism failing,
institutions of security failing. What do we make of this? Well, you start as a historian with
structures and circumstances: things like the gold standard, the political environment, the menu of
competing ideas. Then you add to that the convergence of
issues at the same time. You notice it's not just an economic
story. It's the economic story converging with an
an ongoing political story, too. The still fresh wounds from the First World War that make economic cooperation
unattainable. And then there's also the element of
contingency and choice. Above all: choice. Contingency. For example, those 30 days in
January 1933, where a group of German politicians decide to make
Hitler chancellor. He didn't have to be chancellor. In fact, the Nazis had done less well in the most recent election than they'd done
even earlier. At the end of 1932, a lot of commentators thought the Nazi Party's fortunes were
finally beginning to ebb. But those politicians gave Hitler the
chance to become chancellor. That was the end of the German Republic and a lot
of other things followed. There are choices that were made. Political cooperation in the Far East to rally against the
Japanese and maybe force the Japanese government to confront
the militarists just doesn't come off. Choices about whether to have economic
cooperation to head off the collapse of modern
capitalism. Choice instead to go with no gold
standard, no free trade. Again, choices that were made.
Understandable when you look at the menu of options they had in front of them, but you can begin to see how these choices
converged and accumulated to have enormous consequences, as people are now figuring
out what kind of world they really live in. These choices that we've been looking at
seem so tragic: populations plunging themselves into
totalitarian dictatorships. You have to just pause and think about that for a minute.
What's going on here? Is this just people are just so desperate?
Times are so hard? They think this is the way out?
The complete sacrifice of freedom? Or are there some other ways to think
about it? One explanation that I think you'll find
interesting is the one offered by a German psychoanalyst and
philosopher named Erich Fromm. Fromm was part of a group of theorists and
philosophers sometimes called the Frankfurt School
because they were working at an institute in Frankfurt in the 1920s
and into the early 1930s, partly influenced by Marxism
but partly by other things. Involved in what was called critical
theory: trying to find the deeper explanations for the
way people constructed the world around them. I'm not sure I agree with some of the
arguments that the school makes, but Fromm's argument is a
particularly interesting one. Fromm is making an argument that there are
really two kinds of freedom: what he calls negative freedom and positive freedom.
Negative freedom Fromm describes as freedom, from, oh say, social dictates. People are more independent, more able,
more allowed to choose things. Then there's positive freedom which is the freedom to create. What Fromm talks about is also a little bit about what Henry Adams was talking
about in that essay that we discussed in our earlier presentation. With these modern
changes, people are freed from the old simplicity, unities,
social conformities. They've acquired a lot of this negative
freedom. But actually with all this negative
freedom comes a sense of I don't know what I'm supposed to
do. I don't know who I am.
I don't know what my identity is. Fromm calls this kind of reaction, at
least among some people, the sense of a terror of aloneness and
insignificance. Then what Fromm points out is that, at
least for some people, dictatorship, the surrender to the rule of others, can
actually feel like a blessing, an escape from this negative freedom.
And here's the way he puts it. The individual finds himself free in the
negative sense, that is, alone with his self and confronting an alienated, hostile world. In this situation, to quote a telling
description of Dostoevski [sic], in The Brothers Karamasov [sic], he has no more
pressing need than the one to find somebody to whom he can surrender,
as quickly as possible, that gift of freedom which he, the
unfortunate creature, was born with. The frightened individual seeks for somebody or something to tie his self
to. He cannot bear to be his own individual
self any longer, and he tries frantically to get rid of it
and to feel security again, by the elimination of
this burden: the self. Or, the individual can sublimate himself into something much larger and grander.
Tie this back to that long excerpt we looked at from Benito Mussolini's
explanation of what fascism was all about. The sublimation of the individual into the
state. The identity is found in the identity and
mission of the powerful state. And it seems to me that these two men,
Benito Mussolini and Erich Fromm, are describing two sides
of the same coin. Their notion of how to escape from freedom into what Mussolini
imagines to be a higher collective purpose and what Fromm fears
is a plunge into the abyss.