>> Welcome back.
Make yourself comfortable. Let's see how the politics of extremism
played out in the middle of the 1930s. It's mass politics. The stakes are very high. In these new economies, systematic controls
are everywhere. We got a harbinger of that when we looked
at the way economies were mobilized during
the First World War. And for a lot of these countries the First
World War gave them a tool kit of ideas. As in the 1930s, they converted their economies to systematic command management
of different kinds. There's also new communications. Those old wireless sets where people were
listening to their headphones, now everybody's sitting around the radio and
you can broadcast political messages, news messages to tens of millions of
people instantaneously. Or you can use newsreels that give you the ability to actually show people visual
images. I know this seems commonplace to us today.
In the 1930s, though, every week, people are going into the movie theaters,
sitting down and watching films like this, which is updating them on what we would
now call the Spanish Civil War breaking out in the middle of the
1930s in Spain. [MUSIC] >> And the war goes on. [MUSIC] Even the British Consulate in this Spanish
city feels the effect of shell fire. City after city get the hard effect of
this civil strike. Building after building is torn and
destroyed. Streets, where once peaceful Spaniards
roam, now harbor collapsed structures. Planes soar high overhead, bombing ever
bombing. >> In some of these countries, the
state is being used in entirely new ways. In Germany, for example, by 1935, the state is actually formally identifying people
with racial categories. Jews are being distinctively identified as
Jews. They're forced to wear badges. They're prohibited from certain areas of
employment. The state is getting into defining even
down to who is a Jew based on your parentage and so
on, all of this handled through administrative
records. The state is even getting into the
business of looking at people who might be insane
or whom the state judges genetically unfit
and considering whether those people should perhaps be put
to death. It's still on a relatively low scale in a
place like Nazi Germany, but they're playing with ideas, novel
ideas about how to use state power. Even in the more progressive, we might think, United States of America, the state is playing with these
fashionable ideas about genetics and is approving the sterilization of people
who are being judged mentally unfit. Another thing that's happening in these
extreme movements is notice how in some of them the identities are getting
much larger than just national identities. In the age of nationalism we had national
empires: British Empire, French Empire. The Soviet Union is a Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics. In other words, a union of workers'
republics. It is in a way an empire of workers' democracies. The identity element is what we all have
in common is solidarity as members of the
proletariat, of the working class. That's a transnational identity on which
you can build transnational states of immense
size. Hitler is also identifying a racial
identity, not just German but Aryan, which can extend to all people
who share this racial identity anywhere in Europe. With the politics of extremism, the menu
of choice changes too. Let's revisit again our little schematic
diagram for the different families of political ideas
that have been engaging in this great struggle about how
to organize modern industrial societies, really ever
since the 1880s, 1890s. So remember we started, say at around 1900, with this family of
ideas, in which this group of parties were the
centrists at the top. And then this morphed, National Tradition
monarchist parties are now replaced by Fascist
parties. Revolutionary Socialists solidify into a
international Communist movement. But at the end of the 1920s, I crudely
depict these different families of ideas as roughly
comparable to each other in influence. In the mid-1930s, with the politics of
extremism, that's changed. It's changed in a couple of ways. One: notice that the folks on the far
wings, the Fascists, the Communists, much larger
and more influential. I've tried to represent that schematically
in this way. The Democratic Socialists, Liberals, National Conservatives, relatively
smaller. Let's linger a bit over this new political phenomenon, this new ideology: Social
Democracy, the Social Democrats. Tributaries into this movement, which I've
shown here in purple, come from different
sources. There's an ingredient in here from the
Democratic Socialists. It's about empowering workers and
strengthening unions, and recognizing some of the class
distinctions in society, using the power of government and unions to offset
the power of big business. But there's also some elements of
Liberalism: individual rights, the government
protection of individual rights is flowing into that, as well as the remaining pure
Liberal party. There's a tributary here from the National Conservatives because you're
using the central government, the federal government to
actively modernize the country with powerful new federal
innovations. So, for example, in the United States,
when Roosevelt is building his New Deal Coalition, he's attracting democratic
leftists in the big cities of the United States, people who would have identified
themselves as either Democratic Socialists or an American
version of Liberalism. But Roosevelt is also drawing support from
some of the people who'd identified themselves
as members of the Republican Party, but of the progressive wing of the Republican
Party, who were also attracted to his vision of
an energetic rebuilding of American power in the federal government at home in
domestic affairs. Similar phenomenon, too, in a country like
Sweden, which was pioneering these ideas in Europe in the 1930s, also with some of
these same strains running into it. You see the emerging alliance here? An alliance between the people who want government to do good, sometimes for
individual rights, but also powerful unions and powerful big
business. With the government, big business, big
unions, providing big, combined, central control to build up and protect the
country during the years of Depression. That's part of what's going on in Social
Democracy. If you believe in a little government, in
less government power and more individual liberty in the old-fashioned
19th century sense, you're still going to align yourself more with pure
Liberal parties such as you find in some states in Europe. Now, it's worth just kind of pausing and reflecting about the culture of these mass
politics, because what they all have in common is increasingly the sense of society is one
big industry. One big factory in a way in which
everybody is playing their part in generating national
power. Man becomes just one more essential part
of a very powerful machine. And the supreme metaphor of the era was
the metaphor of steel. Steel as a measure of national power,
steel as a measure of personal power. [LAUGH] You can see it humorously over
here in the first issue of the comic strip featuring a
character called Superman. June 1938 is Action Comics No. 1.
And who is Superman? Why, he is a Man of Steel.
More seriously, perhaps, is this man of steel. Literally, the leader of the Soviet Union
who had changed his name into the name Stalin. After all, the original name,
Jugashvili, the Georgian name he was born with, might not have been too inspiring to the hundreds of
millions of people in the working masses. Stalin, literally the man of steel, is the inspirational figure of the Soviet
Socialist Republics. Now let's zoom in on some particular
illustrations of how the politics of extremism is
playing out. Moving to the United States in the big
city of Chicago, there's a New Deal going on in
the mid-1930s, led by the government of Franklin
Roosevelt, epitomizing these new ideals of social
democracy. In this image imagine: you still have big
businesses, big corporations, steel industries, auto
industries, but they're now matched by big unions. Like, for example, the Congress of Industrial Organizations that increasingly
is pulling the workers together in a city like
Chicago and matching corporate power. You're no longer relying, as you did in the
1920s, on benign big businesses to take care of
their workers. They couldn't take care of their workers
under the strains of the Great Depression. Instead the unions are mobilizing to look
after themselves. There are some huge pitched battles, like, for instance, in the auto-industry between
the new United Auto Workers and companies like Ford and Chrysler that were fighting the
union. So, imagine big business, big unions
mediated, umpired by a big government that is increasingly sympathetic to the
unions, giving them the power to offset corporate power.
That kind of triumvirate captures some of the sense of social democracy.
In a city like Chicago, it's balanced, too, by a continuing heavy reliance on local
government to manage social conflicts. Take this map of Chicago, for instance.
This is from 1950. It's an ethnic map of Chicago. You see how all the different ethnic communities are broken up into their
neighborhoods. Each of them part of a local ward. Each of them represented in their way in a
city government. Genially presided over by the big city
mayor. That's one American vision of how to reconcile differences in these new
stronger states. If we spin the globe and go to China, say to Shanghai, we'll see that the
Republic of China is sponsoring what it called a New
Life movement. Mass organization. Somewhere in between a national
conservative movement and a fascist movement really, drawing a lot of
inspiration from communist examples, but elevating traditional Chinese
Confucian ideals as an important part of their philosophical
mix. The Republic of China is still at war with
its communist enemies. That war that I talked about, getting
started in 1927, centered in Shanghai. If you look at this map, by the mid-1930s
the Chinese Communists had concentrated in a series of these different base areas
called Soviet areas around China. This map shows the victories of the
Chinese Republic, the Nationalists under Chiang Kai-Shek, as
they're chasing the Communists out of their base areas, all of them
eventually withdrawing by 1936 until they are all concentrated right up
here in Yan-an. Now let's spin the globe again and zoom in on the enormous country of South
America, Brazil. What's going on in Brazil? South America isn't immune from all of these ideological arguments taking place
in Europe. They're very much picking them up. They too find appeal in national
conservative, authoritarian rulers veering more and more
towards some of the fascist ideals. For instance, in Brazil their republic is
taken over by military Ruler: Getulio Vargas. Vargas is ruling in the name of the
Republic. He's going to try to stabilize the
Republic. Vargas is mindful of both socialist
examples, the man standing up for the common people
against the wealthy oligarchs, but he's also mindful of some of the fascist illustrations from
Mussolini's Italy. This portrait from the Brazilian
historical magazine Aventuras Historia nicely captures these mixed streams of
influences on the Brazilian leader Vargas, who will maintain
supreme power in Brazil through 1945. But in the middle of the 1930s, no country played a greater role as the theater of
the politics of extremism, watched by the entire world, than Spain and
the Spanish Civil War. So, if we zoom back to Barcelona, a city we visited several times before, what
happened in Spain? After the military dictatorship of Primo
de Rivera, a new republic comes into being around
1931. That republic is more strongly influenced
by the parties of the left. But Spanish politics is very polarized.
The parties of the right don't give up. A Spanish general name Francisco Franco, serving with
the Spanish forces in North Africa, leads a revolt against this
new republic in 1936. Very quickly, the Nationalist armies
fighting the republic control about half of Spain. This map shows you the battle lines. Here are the lines as of about early 1937,
drawn here. See here's Barcelona, one of the absolute centers of the
politics of the Republic. Indeed a British essayist, George Orwell,
will come from England to volunteer to fight for the
Republic. He's written a famous memoir of his
experience called Homage to Catalonia. There's a lot in there about what
Barcelona was like in 1937. Orwell himself will go to fight on this
Eastern Front. Or another author, Ernest Hemingway, will come to visit Madrid. He'll write a novel, For Whom the Bell Tolls, dramatically depicting
fighting occurring here on the Central Front, with the Republic receiving strong assistance from
Soviet advisers. Hemingway describes the Soviet role in
ambivalent terms. Hemingway was deeply sympathetic to the
Republic. Orwell describes his shock as the
communist cadres in Barcelona purge their enemies
on the left, including some of the anarchist parties to which Orwell
himself had been most strongly drawn. He came to regard the communists as just
another form of totalitarian dictatorship, the same kind of dictatorship he had come
to Spain to fight. One way to give you a sense of how the
world saw the stakes in the Spanish Civil War as
much larger than Spain, would be to visit the exposition
held in Paris in 1937. At that exposition, you would've seen, for
example, this exhibit. Study the two women. What a contrast between the woman over
here and the woman over here. What does the exhibit want to tell you
about these two women? Let's zoom in and take a look. You see that more modern woman? She's engaged against women who are
trapped by superstition and the misery of eternal
slavery. She is the woman, capable of engaging and
actively participating in the future. Here's another way of engaging the
population in the struggle. This is the kind of poster you would
have seen hanging in Barcelona. It celebrates the alliance between the Anarchist Militia, the FAI,
and the Industrial and Agricultural Unions, also revolutionary
socialists, over on the right. Ultimately, though, these groups will come
into conflict with the Communists, who want to bring them
under firm control. And those Communists were strongly
supported by arms and advisers from the Soviet Union. International volunteers were organized
into international brigades, which also came
under increasingly firm control from the
Communist International, receiving its orders in
Moscow. On the other side, on the Nationalist
side, they too had foreign allies: Fascist Italy, Nazi Germany, sending
thousands of troops and airmen to fight with the
Nationalists, and the Nationalists win the Spanish Civil
War. The Fascists, the Nazis, their Spanish
allies win. They capture Barcelona, they end up
reducing the Republic to this area here, and then they overrun it all
in 1939. Take, for example, this painting by the
surrealist painter Salvador Dali. Dali, himself Spanish, profoundly
empathized with the plight of his countrymen. It's interesting to contrast a painting
like this and the way it's expressing the
horror of war, with some of the paintings we
looked at early in the course. You remember the sketches we showed you
from Goya about the horrors of war during the French invasion
of Spain in 1808, 1809? Here is the way now in the late 1930s that Dali is trying to express the plight of
his country. Here is the way another Spanish artist,
Joan Miro, is also trying to rally support for the
Spanish cause. Perhaps most famously is this image. This is also displayed at that Paris
Exposition in 1937. This is the work by Pablo Picasso:
Guernica. Guernica was a city in Northern Spain that
was bombed by German and Italian aircraft. Hundreds of people were killed. It was one of the first examples of terror
bombing of cities from the sky, a sight that was to become all too
familiar in the years to come.
But it was still shocking in the 1930s. And Picasso was trying to use art to convey that sense of shock, disorder, and
alarm. From the individual trapped in flames on
the right, to the frenzy of the animals, to images like this one on the left of the
mother holding her stricken child. Here, for example, is a way in which Picasso was trying to
capture that image in an earlier preparatory sketch as
he was preparing the painting. But the Spanish Civil War is really just a
dress rehearsal showing where mass politics was going. These new empires were formulating much
more ambitious plans for how they were going to reshape the
world. It's those plans we're going to turn to next time.