Today, before we get
into the presentation, I want to talk about the relationship
of history to current events. You'll probably notice that
in these presentations, I almost never make any reference to
current events, saying like, what we're seeing here is just like such and
such that's going on in the news today. I don't do that because I feel
that somehow, it's not entirely playing straight with the history to kind
of force its eye, see this is like that. It basically is using the history and making the past fit your image
of what's going on right now. That's a lot of the way
people use history. They kind of grab from history and use it to try to make sense
of what's going on right now. A lot of times though, that really impairs
your understanding of the history itself. I haven't tried to make these
lectures seem more relevant to you just by constantly relating them
to current events, cuz I think, frankly, it messes up your understanding
of current events. And it messes up your
understanding of the history. Now, that's cuz I don't
care about current events. I care a lot about current events. In different things that I do,
I'm involved a lot in current events. But, I think that historical knowledge
is essential to current events, but in a deeper way. Take in the history. Use it just to enrich your understanding
of why things have happened the way they have, the way countries act,
the way choices are made. Not because, oh, yeah, that's gonna be
just like what's going on right now. But because in the same way you learn
from novels, you learn from poetry, historical knowledge can just make you
wiser, make you a little more thoughtful. Okay, back to today's presentation. This is about New Wars for New Empires. In this discussion, I really want
to focus on just about one year, 1937, when some really
formative choices are made. In this course, we've spent a lot
of time trying to unpack choices. Not just to tell you
people made decisions, like these mad dictators
went after empires. But try to understand why they
judge that the situation was right, what they were thinking. Turning these people into cartoon mad
men doesn't enrich your understanding. First of all,
it's important to understand that in 1937, the key dictatorships
looked pretty successful. Look for instance at the dictatorship
in the Soviet Union. By the mid 1930s, Stalin's power
was completely consolidated. He had just completed, in fact,
a war against Soviet farmers. Here's a demonstration made up for
the purposes of the party photographer in which it looks like the farmers are
marching for help from the Soviet Union. In fact, many of the people, probably in this picture,
might soon be suffering from starvation. Because what's happening is,
as you concentrate workers in the cities to man the factories,
you need to get food for them. If you can't get food in a free market,
cuz there is no free market, the State owns all the property. You take what you want from the farmers. You turn, in a way,
the farmers into factory workers. You make them work on state-owned
enterprises called collective farms, and everything they own, their seed, their farm tools,
their produce, all belongs to the State. Farmers who won't go along with this
system, well, they get left behind. And if there's not enough farm
left in the countryside to feed all the farmers that were there,
they starve. And in the early 1930s,
millions of people in the Soviet Union, especially in Soviet Ukraine,
starved to death. With all this understood and tolerated as
a matter of state policy led by Stalin, who is steering the ship of state. But by 1937, Stalin's rule secure, collectivization complete,
Stalin is already eyeing new targets. Italy, it's fascist dictatorship just
completed it's conquest of Ethiopia, creating it's overseas empire. Mussolini's power seems secure. Germany, by the mid-1930s, Hitler felt he'd completed his
reorganization of Germany's domestic life. The German program of rapid
rearmament is well underway. He's not ready to think about,
what's the next stage? In Japan, the Emperor Hirohito,
the Showa Emperor, was overseeing a government really mainly run by
the Japanese Army and the Japanese Navy. They put a civilian leader in charge,
Prince Konoe Fumimaro. Here's a picture of Prince Konoe. Japan now controlled these large
areas in the Chinese mainland. The Republic of China and
Japan are not at open warfare. But the Chinese Republic is simply
refusing to accept Japan's conquest. Japan somehow feels like
they need to do more. They need to somehow get
that republic to agree that Japan's position is
going to be permanent. So think about the way people like Stalin,
Mussolini, Hitler, Prince Konoe and his military
advisers are looking at the world. They see a situation, the world in 36, 37. They see kind of the way
the world seems to work by then. From their point of view, their problems
are what are they going to become? What are they going to
be when they grow up? The answer to all of them is large,
self-sufficient world empires. They frame a choice. You can actually see it. They spell this out. One choice is I build my own empire with
my own access to all the natural resources I need under my country's control,
all the access to the markets I need, all the space that I need,
absolute control. My empire, as strong as if not stronger
than any other power rival in the world. Germany has that perspective. Japan has the perspective. The Soviet Union has that perspective. And Italy also wants its share oriented
around dominating the Mediterranean world. If that's what they want to become,
new empires with identities bound up in race or Pan-Asianism, or
the workers of the world uniting together, these different transnational
images of new world empires. What's the next stage? In 1937, these are the calculations the
leaders of these world empires are making. But one of their factors is, how did they appraise the attitudes
of some of the other powers? The other leading powers in the world
would be the British Empire, the French Empire, and
the United States of America. Let's take a look at the situation
of Britain and France, for example. They're struggling out of the worst
depths of the Great Depression. The British and
French economies are stabilizing. Both feel severely weakened, both feel
preoccupied by domestic concerns. France is ruled by a popular front of
the left and the center left parties, trying to hold itself together,
horrified at the prospect of a World War. But knowing that it's impossible to France
to even think about another World War unless Britain is on its side. From the point of view of France,
the British position is key. And the British position is key. And the British are led by this man,
the Conservative Party leader, Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain. Chamberlain is a willful
powerful prime minister. Strong in the management of his cabinet. His primary concern is
Britain's domestic recovery and the preservation of the British empire
with the various compromises and defensive moves it has to
make to stay together. Chamberlain doesn't want to do anything
that will pick a fight with the dictators. Instead, Chamberlain is about carving
out different spheres of influence, what the Germans will have,
what the Italians will have. And parts of it, they'll leave the British
alone to let them have what they have. Internationally, Chamberlain's
approach is more defensive, as he tries to stabilize and
secure the British imperial status quo. Looking at the United States of America, Franklin Roosevelt has just been
reelected for a second term in 1936. As he takes office in 1937, his primary
concerns are still domestic recovery. America is still having trouble
pulling itself out of the depths of the depression. In international affairs,
Roosevelt doesn't care much for some of these new dictators
at a personal level. He doesn't like them. But his country has no appetite for foreign involvements and
foreign interventions. If you look around the federal city
of Washington DC, the big cabinet departments with the biggest buildings,
the most prized cabinet positions, well that would be the department of
commerce or to be secretary of labor. You give the jobs like secretary of war or secretary of the navy
to political friends. The American army is about
20th largest in the world. Maybe about the size of, oh say, Romania. The Spanish Civil War is
slowly moving to a conclusion. What the Spanish War seems to
show to everybody in 1937, is it's a proxy fight between
the power players of the world. On one side, the Soviet Union and
its allies, on the other side Germany, Italy, and their allies. That's really the two pillars of power. The people in the middle more and
more feel like they need to pick sides between either communism or
anti-communism. That same fault line that had been so
important all through the 1920s. From the point of view then,
of these counter-imperialisms, and by that I mean countries like,
Soviet Union, Germany, Italy, Japan. They're counter-imperialisms because
they want to supplant the power of the British Empire, of the French Empire, with a counter empire of their own
to take their moment in the sun. 1937 is when they start formulating
their plans for the future. They choose new wars. In The Soviet Union in 1936 and 1937, Stalin's main concern is
actually is an internal war. He is going to destroy the last
remnants of his domestic opposition. Let's just take a harder look at
the Soviet Union by the late 1930's. In this detailed map,
it's hard for you to make out. The stuff in green are mines and coal and steel plants done before 1928,
before Stalin takes power. The stuff in red are mines, factories, things like that,
built after Stalin has taken power. You can see where the green is centered, you can see all the red that's
beginning to come into play. We zoom in here on the western
part of the Soviet Union. The area in orange, that's where forced collectivization
of farms has just happened. This is the zone of farm turmoil, mass starvation. You can see the old areas
of Russian industry. But you can see new areas of Russian
mining and industry down here in Georgia. Over here in Central Asia,
lot's of new stuff. And then as you move out into the Soviet
Far East or into the Soviet North. Supporting it,
the Soviet Union has re-instituted what you might of thought was
a discarded practice, mass slave labor. Hundreds of thousands,
ultimately millions of people, put to work in numbers of labor camps. Symbols like this one right here,
that's a labor camp. You see how they're clustered
in the Soviet arctic? Often around mines here at Vorkuta,
for example. Or down here in Central Asia. Or here near the border of Mongolia. Or further into the Soviet far east. This whole zone, the Kolyma Valley
in the Soviet far east in Magadam, is simply a zone of labor exiles. This vast network of camps, slave
labor facilities, forms what the later Soviet author Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn
would call the Gulag Archipelago. Gulags being the Russian term for
these forced labor camps. In 1936 and 1937 Stalin begins
embarking on the systematic purges of a large portion of
the whole Communist leadership. Most of the top officials in
the Red Army are executed. Hundreds of thousands of people, shot. Stalin is concentrating
on waging a war within. Part of forging the Soviet Union that,
perhaps in his view, will be that much more ready
to wage external wars to come. By the summer of 1937, the Japanese have
also made some fateful decisions about what they're going to do to solve
the problem of the Republic of China. Let's take a look first at this map. This area in pink up here you see, these
are the Japanese possessions in 1937. Their basic plans are to pick a fight with
the Republic of China, destroy its forces, humiliate them, and
then try to persuade them to accept peace. It's useful to remember, in thinking about
a map of China, that the most populous, industrious, and cultural regions of China
Are pretty much to the east of that line. So you can see the significance of
the Japanese plans to occupy these huge areas in China's northeast,
and also this area around Shanghai. These moves begin in the Summer of 1937. So if you compare these two maps side by
side, you can see how within a few years, the Japanese had completed their initial
conquest and expanded even further. You can take a little closer look how
Japanese conquests keep expanding. So within a few years, by 1940, they're
working their way down the Yangtze Valley, down the Yellow River Valley, and so on. More and
more footholds on the Chinese coast. This is the scene in
Shanghai in summer of 1937. What you're seeing here is the main
street in Shanghai, called the Bund. The Chinese are streaming from
the bottom of your picture up into the main area here. They're crossing from the Chinese
controlled parts of Shanghai into the international concessions, the
international settlement part of Shanghai. In which they'd be under
the protective jurisdiction for awhile of the British French and
Americans. Its thousands of people looking for
refuge speaks for itself. As the Japanese are making their moves
The Germans are contemplating theirs. We have a remarkable insight into Hitler's
thinking through a meeting that he called, in November 1937 among his closest allies. A meeting where he lays out his master
plan and says that, by the way, if something happens to me this
is my last will and testament. He basically lays it out as
a problem of race and space. Here he says are 85
million Germanic people. They need all the room they need in
which to form a powerful empire. They need space without expansion,
room to expand, mainly to the east. They're not gonna have sufficient space. In saying this, Hitler is really only
saying secretly what he'd actually been writing in books going back to his
memoir of the 1920s Mein Kampf. But some people didn't really believe that
Germany would have such ambitious plans. They thought it was a narrower more
nationalist agenda to overthrow some of the constraints that had been placed
on Germany by the Treaty of Versailles. But, no, Hitler's ambitions were far,
far broader than that. He would need large-scale
imperial expansion to the east. He recognized that there
are only two ways to do this. Either through wars or
through cooperation with others. He explains and rejects cooperation
with others is gonna be impossible. They'll put too many constraints on us. It's gonna have to be wars. Probably will be wars with Britain and
France, he expects. It's just gonna be a matter of time. And then it's simply working out
the development of the master plan, which he explains has to be
completed by the mid 1940s. To understand his plan, we can look at the map you would of looked
at if you were a college student in 1936. Here's a map of Europe in 1936. Lets take a closer look at central Europe. From Hitler's prospective in 1936,
he's just scored a nice victory. This area right here,
called the Rhineland, was demilitarized under
the treaty of Versailles. The German army wasn't
allowed to base in this area. Germany reoccupied,
remilitarized the Rhineland in 1936. The British and French shrugged
their shoulders and let it happen. Assuming that this was just part of
Germany recovering from, the perhaps somewhat restraints that had been
placed on it by, the Versailles treaty. Now, Hitler is turning his
attention to reuniting Germany with the germanic peoples of Austria. He'll move to annex Austria early in 1938. But the next main target will not only be
the German-speaking peoples to be found here in Czechoslovakia, but really
the whole Czechoslovak state itself. And then from there, Germany's expansionist plans are bound
to point towards the end of Poland. So if you step back and take stock of
all of this, there is the Italian empire consolidating it's Mediterranean African
holdings, helping Franco win in Spain. The German empire, quietly, 1937 making
plans for major wars in the East. Anticipating that that might mean
a war with Britain and France. Another major European war. The Soviet Union already moving to wage
an internal war that will kill hundreds of thousands, even millions more of
its citizens preparing itself for something else. In the Far East, Japan, in the summer
of 1937, moving to occupy large portions of China recreating itself in its
own image of the New Pan Asian empire. As these plans unfold, the rest of
the world, and especially the leading democracies, are gonna confront more and
more desperate choices. And it's to those choices we'll turn next.