Hi.
Welcome back. For this presentation the title I've
chosen is Zero Hour, or in German it would be
Stunde Null. It was an expression that they used to get
both a sense of everything's destroyed and
we're starting over from scratch. It seemed like and apt expression for this
period in world history. A period of total war. By total war, total for the people
involved because in some of these countries, if your
military situation is unstable, it means you might not just lose a war, you
might lose everything. You might be enslaved, you might be
murdered: total war, total stakes. And nations in arms mobilizing men, women,
children even. Everybody in the war effort, everybody
working in the government, or for the government, or
around the government. Anyone even in the United States, which
was furthest in some ways from the battlefronts among the
leading combatants, no one who lived through the World War II era
doesn't remember the atmosphere of all of that, what was in
the magazines, what was on the radio, rationing, other
things. It was touching everyone. Let's look at the world of 1944. 1944 was the bloodiest year of fighting in
the whole war. A year of slogging against enemies
fighting fanatically from strong fortified
positions of defense. For example, in Europe at the beginning of
1944, the battle lines were approximately here. In the Eastern
Front, it took a whole year to move about that far. It took about a whole year in Italy for
the Americans, British, other Commonwealth Allies (Indians, New Zealanders,
Australians) to move about that far. The Americans, British, Canadians, free
French, launched this extraordinary invasion across the
channel here. It takes them six months to get to the
battlefront here, so this then is kind of the
remaining territory held by the Nazis at the end of
1944. It will take another six months of brutal,
hard fighting to liquidate the remainder of the German empire, even after Italy had
already gone out of the war. In the Pacific, this map just gives you a little bit of the sense of the enormous
scale. The beginning of 1944, the Americans and
their allies were just beginning to build up the ability to turn the tide and
start marching across to the major Japanese held, fortified
islands, which because of the ranges of aircraft and limitations of supply, needed to be
taken almost one hop at a time. By the end of 1944, they'd moved up here, up here, and
actually they'd suffered losses in China, being driven further back,
maintaining supplies as best they can to the Chinese, over here especially, coming out of India
and over the Himalayas, to be able to get supplies
to try to help keep the Chinese partly in the
fight, even while the British, the Indians, the
Americans and others fighting here in Burma. Which leads to the world of 1945: a broken
world again. Some way of measuring how broken the world
is is just to look at some of these scenes of
devastation. This is Berlin. The former German Reichstag, now in ruins,
covered by the graffiti of the conquering Soviet
soldiers. Or a city like this one. When you look at black and white photographs like these, you see a lot of
these. The images tend to be numbing. They seem very remote because they're in
black and white. They seem distant. You just have to take it a few extra
seconds. Imagine yourself in the photograph, kind
of, about the size of a person in human scale. Imagine all this is in color. Imagine what you would see, if you were
standing there looking around, and you being to get a little more of a feel
for what the photographer is showing you. This is the city of Dresden, bombed to obliteration in early 1945. Again, just imagine you were just one
person standing on the street here. And you can just walk around and see this. Block, after block, after block.
Almost as far as the eye can see. Germany is simply carved up into Allied military zones of occupation, depicted on
this map. Ignore the names of these countries that
will be created later in the 1940s, for now. Right now all of this is just under military
governments. Berlin divided into zones of occupation. This will eventually become the
demarcation between East and West Berlin. Vienna, too, had been divided into zones
of occupation. Japan is also the scene of enormous ruin. The Japanese quit the war before they were
actually invaded, and their country is fought over from one end
to the other as much as Germany was. But Japan is
devastated nonetheless, as this map shows in dry numbers.
These numbers in parentheses is the percentage
of the town or city that had been destroyed by American
bombing raids. Here were the major fire raids.
This one in Tokyo, in March of 1945, killed about 100,000 people. Finally at the end of the war were the twin atomic bombings, one after another, of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. To give you some sense of the scale of that, here's a picture of the atomic
bombing in Nagasaki. This actually does not fully convey the
full scale of it. But an image like this one does. If you
compare these two images on the left here, they're
showing you the same thing. Maybe the only way to really orient
yourself is to notice the line of the river and follow the
major roadway next to it. You see the roadway here and that
can help orient you to follow the same scene on
this map after the atomic bombing. These are radii measured in thousands of meters from ground zero where the bomb
detonated. Here's a scene of ground zero in the city
of Hiroshima. So, obviously this is the meaning of total
war. There's a huge dispute over whether it was necessary to bomb these countries, to bomb
their cities. In both cases, the Allies were desperate
to use any means they had to attack these
countries. They began to see cities as military
targets. If it seems to you then that both sides
are becoming debased in their attitude toward
human life, you're right. It doesn't equate the Americans and the British with Nazi Germany to notice
that all the sides involved in this war were taking an increasingly callous
attitude towards human life and felt brutalized by
it. The Allied military commanders were under
no illusions of this score; they knew, as George Marshall knew, that we were doing
horrifying things in order to win the war. They still thought that there was a
significant moral distinction between bombing cities to try to end the war and
constructing death factories to carry out the genocides of whole people whom they
hope to enslave and then kill. But nonetheless, the horrors being
perpetrated really underscores that this war is pushing the whole meaning of
civilization to the very brink. You're really at the point where people
are creating destructive powers that are just about beyond the capabilities
of human reason, human spirituality to control or understand.
And then the war ended. It ended in Germany with an austere
military ceremony. There was no German government to take a
surrender. The Americans regarded the German
government as nothing, as wreckage. They just took a surrender from German
generals in the field, in a simple little ceremony in a French
schoolhouse. On the other side of the world, though, in
Tokyo Bay, the Americans and their allies did allow a
Japanese government to remain. They allowed the Japanese emperor to
remain in power. So there actually was, then, a formal
surrender ceremony on the battleship Missouri in
early September 1945. You see the sailors and others gathered
all around to see the sight. The Japanese dignitaries
coming onto the deck for the ceremony where they will sign
the surrender documents. The war was ending. What kinds of visions of modern society
were coming out of it? If this is part of a gigantic struggle
about how to organize these modern societies, what are the
lessons people are taking away from this? One is: This becomes the era of high
modernism, government planning at its height. Well, one part of it is high liberalism. That is, the war had been about rescuing
the world from tyranny and liberals had always thought of
themselves as the opposite of tyrants. So, in one sense, the war helped with
liberal ideals. This was actually really important in the
United States of America, which still had a separate legal system,
separate political system for African Americans. The ideals the Americans had embraced in
the war made it harder and harder to sustain the regime of Jim Crow in the
American South after the war was over. But also the immensely powerful
governments that are created in this period begin to
discover society but discover society as this
object that would be the focal point of
engineering. We talked a little bit about this before
in an earlier section. Remember, I showed you a scene, a
screenshot, from the video game Sim City. I'm just showing you another one again. Just to remind you of this image of
society being something that I manipulate through the choices of big thinking
planners. You need this kind of outlook of I'm
going to plan and arrange everything by the demands of having to
manage large territories all over the world, by the demands of having
to manage whole economies. We saw a forerunner of that in the First
World War, but you can see how much this expanded in the
Second World War. Urban management, too. More and more of
these large cities and mayors and others who regards
themselves as kind of managers of Sim City.
War management. We've glimpsed a sense of the way in which
government needs to arrange every aspect of access to raw materials, allocation to production facilities, use of manpower,
and the like. But one cultural thing I want to hit on
is, by the end of the 1940s, there's also this sense
of all this technology. The power of this technology. The whole sense that you want to be
modern. High modernism is not just about practical
requirements of government policy. There's a level of cultural conformity
here, too. Like, I'm in charge of this city or this
country, and I want to make it more modern. We've talked about top-down modernizers in
the late 1800s and the early part of the 20th
century. This era of the mid-century is giving them
a huge boost. Culturally, the aspiration, if you're not
modern yet, we want to make you modern. You have to be modern to survive. Of course, you can satirize these images
of modernity. Here, here's an American rock band, Devo, in the 1980s, giving you their
image of what it's like to be modern. But in the mid-1940s, people are taking this way more seriously as lessons from
the war. Imagine, who would you look around and
think are the examples of success in this war? Well really, there are two big models of
success. The United States of America and the
Soviet Union. Two very contrasting models. But they seemed to show the way of the
future. What does that way look like? Here's an especially influential book in
the English speaking world. It's written by a man named James Burnham.
Burnham's a rather interesting fellow. American, very bright, graduated from
Princeton became a communist and eventually grew
disillusioned with the Stalinist dominated communist party
and became a dissident Trotskyite in the late 1930s. Began to leave the communist movement in
the beginning of the 1940s in a journey that would
eventually take him to the right wing of American
politics, eventually earning him accolades by no
less than Ronald Reagan. But that was decades to come. Here's the Burnham of the 1940s.
He's just published this new book during the war called The
Managerial Revolution. And Burnham's argument is communism,
capitalism, Soviet Union, United States, you know
what? It's all becoming pretty much alike. It's all a matter of really big
organizations, run by technocratic managers who are going to
arrange everything in society. In a way, think of all those science fiction TV shows and science fiction
movies you've seen. Where there's the faceless, impersonal government that's
somehow rearranging things in the future, run by people in suits. That's what Burnham was imagining in this
book in the 1940s. That's what he sees as the wave of the
future. It's a serious vision that should be
taken seriously. His argument focuses on the rule of the
administrators in business and government, both of which are
now on a gigantic Scale. And, actually, the most eloquent and enduring reaction to Burnham's book is
this book, you may have heard of it, by George Orwell:
1984. This is the cover of the original edition
published in England. What you may not realize is, if you've read 1984, is Orwell is reacting to
Burnham. He has a vision of the world dominated by
endlessly warring governments, very much alike,
dominated by these powerful bureaucrats. Is there any way out? Another influential book of the mid-1940s
is this one, by Friedrich Hayek, The Road To
Serfdom. This is also very widely reviewed in 1944-
1945. Hayek is making the argument that visions
like those of James Burnham are disturbingly
prescient, and that people need to fight it. That the growth of big government, or the
growth of socialist governments, are all part of the same story that he regards
as the road to serfdom. Hayek is really, he's a European liberal
of the old school. Actually, his background is in Austria,
his economic thinking is deeply liberal, almost a revival of Adam Smith, or John
Stewart Mill, adapted for the conditions of the 20th century. But coming out of World War II, a lot of
Americans who had been part of the New Deal, part of Roosevelt's social
democratic movement felt that very powerful government planning was
going to be needed. Here's a cartoon that actually captured
some of the concern that these men had. They saw all this gigantic effort to build raw materials, to transport them to
factories to build stuff, railroads, all the rest.
But who will buy the goods? How will America keep from simply
relapsing back into the long-term, significant
unemployment of the 1930s? It was thought that only large- scale government programs could provide
that assurance. Now to wrap up this presentation, let's
just take a look at the contrasting agendas of the
Soviet government and the American government
when World War II comes to an end. Let's start with Stalin and the Communist
world. What's Stalin's dominant concern? Stalin's able to explain his concerns to
the other side in a couple of key wartime
conferences. At the end, in February 1945, they meet in
Yalta on the Black Sea. Ordinarily, Yalta's a summer resort, but
in February, every place in the Soviet Union is cold. So everybody's bundled up as they pose for
these pictures outdoors. Roosevelt in the middle, Churchill, Stalin
over here. They get together again in July 1945 in
Potsdam. Here's Stalin and Truman. Truman had just became President in April, when Franklin Roosevelt collapsed from a
cerebral hemorrhage. They're all gathering together in the
gardens of this palace in the suburbs of a city
that around them is entirely in ruins. Potsdam is a suburb of Berlin. So what's the Soviet Union's dominant
concern? Well, their security, but from the point
of view of someone like Stalin, it was totally
logical that the security of the Soviet Union was also
bound up in the future of communism and the world
revolutionary agenda. The better communism did, the weaker
capitalism became, the more secure the Soviet Union would be. The kinds of strategies, then, that he
would have in mind to assure the security of his country and
all of its dependencies: some territorial expansion to give himself
more of a protective barrier, if you take a defensive view of it;
certainly to disable Germany and Japan; maintain the wartime alliance as long as
possible; maintain also a global network of obedient
local parties, communist parties. But now contrast that with Roosevelt's
vision. In some ways, there's a lot of overlap: His dominant concern, which he's also able
to express at Yalta, which Truman inherits and tries to follow
at this point in summer 1945 as faithfully as he can at
Potsdam, he's interested in the security of the
United States. He doesn't want a renewal of the war. He's especially worried about a renewal of
the Great Depression, too; very concerned about the economic future of the United
States and the Western world. So what kind of strategies would he have
in mind? Maintain the wartime alliance, sure; also disable Germany and Japan, perhaps in
somewhat different ways; the Americans are a little different in that
they hope that they can create arrangements of
international cooperation in political affairs, security affairs,
economic affairs, building a bunch of new
institutions, institutions we now know better today by
names like the World Bank, for example, or the United
Nations; the Americans are also very concerned,
more than the Soviets are, with rebuilding a functional world economy. Remember how world trade had just
completely collapsed during the 1930s? The Americans are thinking a lot about how
to get it going again. They're also thinking about how to end
empires, trusteeships, which they see as part of the old world that needs to be swept away to
create a more peaceful world where there's freer
trade and, frankly, greater opportunities for American
business. You see, they're remembering that, in the
1930s, Britain had finally built a trade wall around its
empire. So some of this agenda is putting the
Americans, not so much in conflict with the Soviets, as in conflict
with the British and with the French. So if you look at these two agendas, you
see some things that are in common, some
things that are different. But think about which of these agendas
would you have found more appealing if you were a citizen
in one of these countries in 1945. Just ask yourself: Which of these two visions
of the world has more substantive of appeal, as a
message? Think about the different images of the
two powers. Which one seems more powerful, attractive,
compelling to you? Think about style. Just as a matter of cultural openness or
approach, which of these two great powers and all the things they
represent seem more attractive? I'm not asking you to vote for one side or
the other, I'm just asking you to think about how a lot of different people around
the world would've sorted out their answer to
this question. But just because I've described two
different visions of the world's future, it didn't mean that they
necessarily conflicted. It's worth analyzing that. There's a lot those visions have in
common, some things that the Americans care about that the Soviets don't care
about as much, but ask yourself: Where did these visions have to collide?
Now, I could try to do a list here of, okay, what are the, precisely, what are
the likely points of friction in 1945? Hmm. Well, there are annexations. The Soviets are taking chunks out of old
Germany. They're moving the whole country of Poland
about 150 miles to the west, and they're doing things to force
the creation of a Soviet controlled government in Poland, and that
rankles. Remember, Britain and France went to war
in 1939 to fight for the security of Poland. Poland's important to many Americans, too. Geopolitically, you could swallow it, and
say, oh well, oh well, too bad. But it rankles, hurts.
People care about it, they notice it. So that's a likely point of friction. Another is, would be areas where you're
running up right against each other, and you're forced to work together even though your systems are very, very
different. Where do they have to work together in
harness? Germany, where they both have
responsibility of running the occupation of the country. Another point of friction is yeah, you
have two different global systems, okay. But they actually intersect in countries
where there are local communist parties that, it is feared, are trying to
overthrow the established government. China, for example, where there's an
ongoing civil war that's reigniting in 1945.
France, Italy, some other countries, where the
clash between these two systems are domestic, political clashes
about the future of their country. Issues of trade and exchange, how to
rebuild the new trading system. As I mentioned earlier, a lot of this is
actually friction among the wartime Allies between
America and the British and the French. The same goes for arguments about
decolonization, also friction between the Americans and
the British and French. So you look at these likely points of
friction, hard to predict exactly how that's
going to turn out, what the dominant agenda's going to be in the
postwar era. I mean, we know how it came out. We think that it's all predetermined. I'm just trying to give you a sense of, if
you had done a dispassionate analysis in 1945, you might have noticed
these things, but how all this would play out would not have
been obvious to you. And of course that gives us something to
talk about next time. See you then. [BLANK_AUDIO]