Welcome back. When we finished the presentation last
time, the year was 1951. Political leaders had walked right up to
the edge of a cliff, looking over the brink into World War III.
and decided not to jump off. But societies all over the world, by the
early 1950s, were realizing that World War III had almost come and could come at any time.
They started living and imagining the world of preparing for World War III.
Trying to survive World War III. What I want to emphasize now, then, is
what the general sense that World War III was coming did to political culture.
You have a sense of overwhelming national mobilization, and a profound insecurity,
that general war could come at any time, and that it could touch any community in the United
States in the age of the atom bomb. This time Time Magazine cover in February
1951 shows the head of the new Office of Defense Mobilization,
mobilizer Charles Wilson, Americans don't know their own
strength. Look at this tree of liberty girded by the
sword and shield. See all the industries, factories, down
here, and the tree is sprouting all kinds of
weapons. That captures a little bit of the image of how Americans were seeing themselves in
early 1951. Meanwhile, in 1950 and 1951, the Americans
decide they're going to have to keep Korea from happening again in Germany. Their forces are going to have to move to
Germany in strength. A commitment of ground forces to defend
the German frontier dates from this period; it will last for more
than 40 years. And that defense is going to have to be a
forward defense, setting up an American tripwire, where any move against that
frontier is going to engage the Americans in war from the first hours and with it the possible threat of the use of nuclear
weapons. What’s happened then, in 1950-51, there's a
real change in the character of the Cold War. Even at the beginning of 1950, for almost all Americans and indeed
citizens of many countries, the Cold War was a foreign
policy thing. It was kind of an abstraction. It involved far away countries and
geopolitical chess games. Now there was a danger of World War III
and that war could come to any American or Russian or European community, perhaps
with very little notice. The reserves have been called up. Thousands of Americans are fighting and
dying in a war against the most populous country on
Earth. In other words, as the historian Lisle Rose
has put it, the Cold War comes to Main Street. I'd like you to look now at a film clip. This was an educational film made by
American Civil Defense Agencies shown to American school children
all over the country, beginning in 1951, and then continuing for
years after that. It was telling them how to get ready to survive,
the sudden onset of World War Three. Take a look at this for a few minutes, and
then I'll talk to you about it some more. [MUSIC] >> Dum dum, deedle dum dum, deedle dum
dum, deedle dum dum, there was a turtle by the name of
Bert, and Burt the turtle was very alert, when danger
threatened him he never got hurt, he knew just what to do.
[NOISE] He'd duck, and cover, duck and cover. He did what we all must learn to do, you,
and you, and you, and you. Duck and cover. >> Be sure and remember what Bert the
Turtle just did friends because every one of us must remember to
do the same thing. That's what this film is all about.
Duck and cover. This is an official civil defense film
produced in cooperation with the Federal Civil Defense Administration. And in consultation with the Safety Commission of the National Education
Association. Produced by Archer Productions
incorporated. Hey Bert. Come on out and meet all these nice
people. Please.
Alright, we really can't blame you. You see Bert is a very, very careful
fellow. When there's danger this is the way he
keeps from being hurt, sometimes it even saves his life. That's why these children are practicing
to duck and cover just as you do in your school. We all know the atomic bomb is very
dangerous. Since it may be used against us, we must
get ready for it. Just as we are ready for many other
dangers that are around us all the time. Fire is a danger, it can burn whole
buildings if someone is careless. But we are ready for fires, we have a fine
fire department to put out the fire. And you have fire drills in your school,
so you'll know what to do. Automobiles can be dangerous, too, they
sometimes cause bad accidents. But, we're ready, we have safety rules
that car drivers and people who are walking
must obey. Now, we must be ready for a new danger,
the atomic bomb. First, you have to know what happens when
an atomic bomb explodes. You will know when it comes. We hope it never comes, but we must get
ready. It looks something like this. There is a bright flash, brighter than the sun, brighter than anything you've
ever seen. If you are not ready and did not know what to do, it could hurt you in different
ways. It could knock you down hard, or throw you
against a tree or a wall. It is such a big explosion, it can smash
in buildings and knock sign boards over, and break
windows all over town. But, if you duck and cover, like Bert, you
will be much safer. You know how bad sunburn can feel. The atomic bomb flash could burn you worse than a terrible sunburn, especially where
you're not covered. Now you and I don't have shells to crawl
into like Bert the Turtle, so we have to cover up in our own way.
First, you duck. And then, you cover. And very tightly you cover the back of
your neck, your face. Duck and cover underneath a table or desk,
or anything else close by. In Betty's school they are talking about
the atomic bomb, too. Betty is asking her teacher how can we
tell when the atomic bomb may explode? And a teacher is explaining that there are
two kinds of attack, with warning and without
any warning. We think that most of the time, we will be
warned before the bomb explodes, so there will be time for us to get into our
homes, schools, or some other safe place. Our civil defense workers, and our men in
uniform, will do everything they can to warn us before enemy planes can
bring a bomb near us. You may be in your schoolyard playing when
the signal comes. That signal means to stop whatever you're
doing and get to the nearest safe place fast. Always remember, the flash of an atomic
bomb can come at any time, no matter where you may
be. You might be out playing at home when the
warning comes. Then be sure to get in to the house fast,
where your parents have fixed a safe place for
you to go. If you are not close to home when you hear
the warning, go to the nearest safe cover. Know where you are to go, or ask an older
person to help you. You know the places marked with the ‘S’
sign? They are safe places to go when you hear
the alarm. If there is a warning, you will hear it before the bomb explodes.
[SOUND] But sometimes, and this is very, very important, sometimes the bomb might
explode without any warning. Then the first thing we would know about
it would be the flash, and that means duck and cover
fast wherever you are. There's no time to look around or wait. Be like Bert when there is a flash, duck
and cover and do it fast. Here are some older boys showing what to
do if the flash comes when you are not in the
classroom. This is what to do if you should be in a
corridor. You duck and cover tight against the wall
this way. Remember to keep your face and the back of
your neck covered tightly. Try to fall away from windows or doors
with glass in them, then if the glass breaks and flies through the
air it won't cut you. You might be eating your lunch when the flash comes, duck and cover under the
table. Then if the explosion makes anything in
the room fall down it can't fall on you. Getting ready means we will all have to be
able to take care of ourselves. The bomb might explode when there are no
grownups near. Paul and Patty know this, and they're
always ready to take care of themselves. Here they are on their way to school on a beautiful spring day,
but no matter where they go or what they do, they always try to remember what to do if the atom bomb explodes right
then. It's a bomb! Duck and cover!
Paul and Patty know what to do. Paul covered the back of his head so that
he wouldn't be burned. And Patty covered herself with a coat she
was carrying. They knew how to duck and cover.
They acted right away when the flash came. If they had been at this doorway when the
bomb flashed, Paul and Patty would have ducked and covered
this way, like this girl. Heavy doorways are a good place to duck
and cover. She will be safer, too. Here’s Tony going to his cub scout
meeting. Tony knows the bomb can explode any time
of the year day or night. He is ready for it. Duck and cover.
Attaboy Tony, that flash means act fast. Tony knows that it helps to get to any
kind of cover. This wall was close by so that's where he
ducked and covered. Tony knew what to do. Notice how he keeps from moving or from
getting up and running. He stays down until he is sure the danger
is over. The man helping Tony is a Civil Defense
worker. His job is to help protect us when there is danger of the atomic bomb.
We must obey the civil defense worker. We must know how to duck and cover in a
school bus. Or any other bus or street car.
Duck and cover! Don't wait.
Duck away from the windows fast. The glass may break and fly through the
air and cut you. Sundays, holidays, vacation time, we must
be ready everyday, all the time, to do the right
thing if the atomic bomb explodes. Duck and cover. This family knows what to do, just as your
own family should. They know that even a thin cloth helps
protect them, even a newspaper can save you from a bad
burn. But the most important thing of all is to
duck and cover yourself, especially where your
clothes do not cover you. No matter where we live, in the city or
the country, we must be ready all the time for the
atomic bomb. Duck and cover! That's the first thing to do.
Duck and cover. The next important thing to do after that, is to stay covered until the danger is
over. Yes, we must all get ready now. So we know how to save ourselves if the
atomic bomb ever explodes near us. If you do not know just what to do, ask
your teacher when this film is over. Discuss what you could do in different
places, if a bomb explodes. Older people will help us as they always
do. But there might not be any grown ups
around, when the bomb explodes. Then, you're on your own. >> Remember what to do, friends.
Now tell me right out loud. What are you supposed to do when you see
the flash? Duck and cover! [MUSIC]. >> Duck and cover.
Duck and cover.
Duck and cover. >> A few reflections on this film. First, think about why people made this
film. They made this film and they showed it in
classrooms all over the United States because they were trying to save
the lives of some of their children. They're imagining that there could be a nuclear war that could start at any
moment. That in that nuclear war, for sure,
millions of people may die. But, if you're presented with a
calculation that says: If they take no precautions, we could lose 5 or 10
million people, but if I show this film and millions of
people take elementary precautions, let's suppose they judge, I might reduce my death or casualty rates by 20%
at the margin with these precautions. If I make this film and scare school
children with it all over the country, if I saved that 20%, maybe I've saved
two million lives. You do that cost benefit analysis.
And what decision do you make? But that's the kind of reasoning that's
going through people's heads in 1951 when they're deciding to make a movie like
that. Second, notice the apparatus of defense
that has to be in every American community: the shelters, the civil defense
employees, all of that. That's everywhere in Arkansas, and
Montana, and Texas, and Florida -- you get a sense of national
mobilization. Think too about how that movie is telling you war may
come at any time and you may be anywhere when it comes and
no one will be safe, no matter where you live or no matter what
they're doing. This is a very different kind of
insecurity than people had experienced, certainly people living in the United
States of America, which used to believe that it was
sheltered by its oceans. If you understand the world underneath a movie like that, you can understand so
much about the world of the 1950s, which we'll
explore some more in my next presentation. See you then.