Hi, welcome back. Let's take a deeper look at the nuclear
revolution. At the start of this revolution, what
these really were were just a colossal kind of
bomb, and then they became a whole lot bigger
than that. As a colossal kind of bomb, only the United States had them from 1945 until
1949. So for a period, that was kind of a reassuring monopoly, and the Americans
didn't feel like they needed to build up all the rest of their forces
as much. The United States actually worked on some
ideas for how to put atomic bombs and this technology
under international control. The most interesting of these ideas was
developed in 1946. They watered down some of these ideas, and
by the time they really tried them out, they didn't really think
the Soviets would accept them and probably half didn't want the Soviets to accept
them. In some ways, from a historical point of
view, the interesting thing about these ideas is that the Americans
even developed them at all. It was kind of a quixotic notion but intellectually important because some of
these original ideas about how to bring these incredibly hazardous
technologies under international control were pretty far sighted and remain
relevant today. Now what they failed to control is
actually something called a fission bomb. The early atomic bombs were produced by a
process of nuclear fission. Now to just help you get a sense of the
scale for this, if I have a ton of TNT, 2,000 pounds of TNT,
that's a chemical explosive, a ton of TNT would level the building that
I'm sitting in right now. Now imagine the destructive power, not of a ton of
TNT, but of a thousand tons of TNT. Even 10,000 tons of TNT. 10,000 tons of TNT, that's about the destructive force of the first atomic
bombs. They were delivered in airplanes like this
one: This is the state-of-the-art nuclear
bomber of the late 1940s. This is the B-29. A B-29 actually crashed in the Soviet
Union. They captured it nearly intact, and the
Soviets very quickly built almost an exact copy of
it. So, here's what those fission bombs look
like. This is the Soviet test in 1949.
Here's another American test. There's the flash and then the mushroom
cloud. A few minutes later, the mushroom cloud
dissipates as these observers are watching in a 1955 test in the Nevada Desert.
And those atomic bombs, those fission bombs,
had of course terrible effects. This was actually a Civil Defense pamphlet
that was explaining the kinds of effects that
they have. Atomic bombs have their effects in three
ways. First is heat, second is blast, over pressure per square inch, and the third is
radiation, including the irradiation of all the
particles thrown up by the blast and then can drift with prevailing winds until the lethality of that radiation
dissipates. That's called the effects of fallout.
As this pamphlet explains, using a hypothetical atom bombing problem
as worked out if it happened in Seattle in the summer of 1950, you see a highly deadly radius of the explosion of, oh,
approximately one mile. When the Americans lose their monopoly on
the atomic bomb, the instant question for them is: What does this now mean for
the way we defend ourselves? One choice is: We need to develop much, much larger
conventional forces because we can no longer rely on atomic bomb as
our trump card. Another idea is to take up an argument that had been made by some atomic
scientists for a few years which is: You need to pick up the technical possibility of building a
fusion bomb. A thermonuclear bomb where you use the
fission reaction to create a fusion reaction, that might use something like uranium or
plutonium that then creates a fusion reaction, using
for example, something like hydrogen and converting its atomic energy into
explosive power. These fission-fusion bombs, or sometimes
called hydrogen bombs or H-bombs, are vastly more
powerful. At the beginning of 1950, the Americans make their decision
to approve the development of these colossal thermonuclear bombs, then called,
simply, The Super. The Soviet Union had already also
recognized the theoretical possibility of these bombs, partly from
their own scientific work, partly because of spies that they had
originally had in the American atomic bomb program back
in the 1940s. And as a result, the Soviets were already proceeding with developing their
own thermonuclear weapons, though their development of them is a year
or two behind the Americans by the early 1950s. There is a tendency in some of the
literature to see a world in which both super powers have
nuclear weapons as relatively stable because each one can threaten to destroy
the other. And therefore both sides are deterred from war. In fact, it didn't feel stable at all at
the end of the 1940s and during the 1950s. And even into the early 1960s, because the
technical developments in these different weapons created windows of vulnerability
and windows of opportunity. You have a window of vulnerability at a point where both sides have nuclear
weapons but one side has much more powerful conventional forces. The famous American planning document,
National Security Council document 68, NSC 68, was written in early 1950,
really as an argument, a brief, in which those
who wanted to spend a lot more money on
defense were saying: We've got to do that because the Soviets have cancelled out our atomic
advantage. But the people who were advocating that big additional defense spending didn't win their arguments, even inside the American
government, until the outbreak of the Korean War and
the Chinese entry into the war. The big decisions on defense spending
don't start getting made until the end of 1950, and then it takes
off. On the other hand, there are also choices that are being made by the Soviets and
Chinese. At the point that they have some nuclear
bombs, they have to decide when to make their moves in some of these
ongoing conflicts, like the one in Korea. One issue for Stalin and Mao may be: Did
they move too soon? Should the Soviets have waited to build up
more nuclear weapons, done a better job of canceling
out the American advantage, before they moved
conventionally? For instance, as soon as the Americans
moved to the defense of Korea, they also threw
their military forces into the Taiwan Strait to defend
Taiwan against the Chinese invasion, a decision they
hadn't made before. They also begin helping the French in
their situation in Indochina as well. Should the Soviets and the Chinese have waited a little bit and then made
their move? Who knows? What then happens though is this:
The Americans have this gigantic buildup. By the early 1950s, now the balance of
potential advantage shifted. Now it's the Americans who have a window
of opportunity. When the new American president, Dwight
Eisenhower, comes into office in 1953 some of his advisors are telling him we
now have the upper hand. We've developed all kinds of nuclear
weapons and new kinds of ways of delivering them, jet-powered bombers like this B-47, which we have in bases encircling the
Soviet Union. With all this power, we now have the upper
hand. Should we do something to use it? Some of his advisers are arguing, some of them even in public,
in favor of launching a preventive war
against the Soviet Union. Think about the logic from their point of
view. If we wait, the Soviet Union will soon develop a complete capability to destroy
our country. Do we wait for them to have that ability and hope that we can deter them from using
it? Or should we actually use our advantage right now, for the next
two, three years, and launch a preventive war that can
destroy the Soviet Union and its capabilities before they have the
ability to destroy us? The Eisenhower administration looks at the
options in 1953, they weigh the risks. Eisenhower decides no, we're going to
adopt a strategy of containment. We're going to rely on deterrence.
Containment plus deterrence. You can imagine all the judgments,
including even moral judgments, that were embedded in
that calculation. Eisenhower, in a way, makes a moral
calculation, he cared a lot about the morality of nuclear
war. His judgment was, he was going to threaten
nuclear war in order to avoid any kind of general war at
all. The stakes involved in these calculations
then vastly change as these new thermonuclear weapons begin to come into
play in the middle of the 1950s. Here's the way the American people were told about the development of this new
weapon when it was tested out in the open in a
little atoll in the Pacific Ocean. This is a Time Magazine cover from April 1954.
And here's Life Magazine in April 1954 offering the first color pictures of
the awesome fireball. How deadly was it? Remember, I talked about the explosive
force of an atomic bomb, being oh, in the neighborhood of 10,000 tons of TNT?
The Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombs of 1945 had a destructive force in that
neighborhood of ten to 15,000 tons of TNT. Ten to 15 kilotons. A hydrogen bomb could fairly readily have
a destructive force of a million tons of TNT, a megaton.
In other words, one of these bombs already had a destructive force 100
times that of the atomic bomb. You'll remember I showed you a civil
defense diagram that showed a really lethal radius for an atomic bomb of about
one mile from the blast. In this diagram, you see a fairly lethal
radius going out to about seven miles from the blast for a
hydrogen bomb. Do the quick calculations and in the
atomic bomb case, that's an area of high lethality of
a few square miles. In the hydrogen bomb case, that's an area of extreme lethality covering about 150
square miles. And, of course, the radioactive fallout
kicked up by these far larger blasts would correspondingly
also be that much greater. As a result, we're now thinking of bombs
that don't just damage parts of cities, but
destroy entire cities. Indeed, when such detonations occurred in
the thousands or tens of thousands of explosions, threats to entire hemispheres,
maybe even to the population of the Earth itself. So as we arrive here in contemplations of
this deadly standoff by the middle of the
1950s, let's just think back on what's happened since the
last year of World War II, as people are thinking
about preparing for a new world after the Second World War. I haven't tried to talk a lot about
assigning blame to one side or another. I think, in some ways, you can start, as you
work through these problems, of just again thinking about people
solving problems. Think about the leaders, the people around
them. Think about the kinds of problems they
faced as the war ended: rebuilding societies, organizing new societies, what they
thought their choices were, where those choices were bound to come into conflict,
and then how people solved those problems. They're solving those problems in terribly
tragic circumstances, in which a lot of possibilities are bound
to be in play. And therefore, ordinary people, doing the
best they can according to their value systems
of how to solve these problems, are making
truly world shaping choices that can have catastrophic consequences
for the entire future of the planet. Next time, we'll talk a little bit more
about the whole way the world is being reorganized
in the 1950s. See you then. [BLANK_AUDIO].