[BLANK_AUDIO] Hi, welcome back. Let's look at some of the ways in which the governments of the world organized
themselves during the 1950s. New Empires and Confederations. So, we've
talked about the world of empires. In the mid-1950s, the empires are mainly
still there. India is independent.
Indonesia is independent. But if you look, for instance, at this map of the world in
1939, you don't have to break down exactly whose
colony belonged to whom, but you do get the sense though of
lots of different colonies and mandates all
over the world. Contrast that with the world of the
mid-1950s. You don't have to do too much with this
map except simply to notice that the dark red stuff, that's still part of
the British Empire, is still substantial. The pink is now part of a British
Commonwealth: independent states that still regard the
queen as their sovereign, independent states in a league, or a kind
of confederation, dedicated to their common heritage and
economic understanding and political cooperation, as fellow members
of a British Commonwealth. The green here, like
here, is still part of the French Empire,
Indochina in the early 1950s and so on. The empires, though, are changing. We talked in the 1800s about imperial
partnerships: partnerships between colonial rulers and colonial elites, wealthy merchants, financiers, landowners, other men of property who are the essential partners of
the colonial rulers in managing these domains. What's happening during the 1950s, as empires are receding, the elites are
rising. But what had been a partnerships remains a
partnership. It's just that instead of this side being
dominant maybe this side becomes dominant, but this side is very much in play. The British role recedes, but it's still
substantial. They may now be junior partners in a Commonwealth Member, but their oil companies, their
political advisers, their military advisors may
still be deeply involved there, so shifting
imperial partnerships. As decolonization unfolds, you change from
one kind of partnership to another one, in which the locals have
more autonomy. Now this is a little more complicated: In this world of persistent
multinational organizations, new kinds of imperial
partnerships or commonwealths, now there's an overlay on top of that, an
anti-communist confederation. This too is a multinational organization,
or really a set of organizations, led by the United
States. You'll notice that I use the word, here,
anti-communist confederation.
I don't use the word American Empire. That term is used very casually. Empire has a fairly specific meaning. These countries, let's say, that are
countries that for example are part of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, are not
really part of an American Empire, they remain
independent countries. They are, however, part of an anti
communist confederation. What do I mean by the term confederation? Well, I'll not tell you what I mean by it,
this is the definition of the term in the
Oxford English Dictionary. You can look at the first definition in
which a confederation is a kind of league or even a kind of alliance. I especially like, though, the second definition here for
confederation: a number of states united by a league,
united for common purposes. It is in effect a kind of union of sovereign states for common action in
relation to externals. That seems to be the best definition I've
found for the kind of multi-national organizations the United
States is setting up all over the world. One of the interesting things about that
for the Americans is that they begin to view the members of this league with
them almost in the way they view countries that are a part of their
domestic politics. I mean, literally, Americans would be
involved in the domestic politics of these countries, and they
would be involved in domestic politics in the United States as if they
were part of some common political entity, which in
a way they were. So, here are German politicians lobbying
members of Congress. American politicians forming kinships with members of this or that German
political party. Indeed, American presidents knowing better
who the leaders are of one or another German states sometimes, than they knew who the governors were of states inside the United
States. It's this enlarged sense of identity, for instance of being part of an Atlantic
community, that's one of the striking things to
understand about this world of the 1950s. Their interests, our interests, are
different, yet blended somehow. In 1947, the Americans lead the
negotiation of a Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, a kind of defense treaty
involving every country colored here. Mexico was a member, too; it withdrew more recently, which is why
it's shown in a different color. That treaty was signed in Rio de Janeiro in 1947. The Inter-American Treaty of Assistance,
called the Rio Pact, aimed increasingly at the outside danger
of communist subversion. Most famously, and most importantly, was
this treaty: the North Atlantic Treaty. When first signed in 1949 in Washington,
it just said North Atlantic Treaty. After the mobilization in the aftermath of the Korean War, it becomes a North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, with a multinational military headquarters, commanding sets of
ground forces, air forces, naval forces, in being with
multinational military commands, constant interaction between the
politicians, officials, generals, and colonels of this North Atlantic
community. You can see them colored in blue, shaded depending on the different years
in which they joined, facing the opposing alliance of the Warsaw
Pact led by the Soviet Union. In the mid-1950s, the British, with
support from the United States, began organizing a
Baghdad Pact that would have linked all these countries
in an anti-communist confederation, supported
by the United States. The potential tension between a pact led
by the British, much hated in parts of the world, created
nationalist tensions that lead to the disintegration of this alliance by
the end of the 1950s. In Southeast Asia, though, the Americans
take the lead in forming a Southeast Asia Treaty Organization and another kind of
anti-communist confederation. This shows a ceremony where the leaders
are getting together in Manila, the capital of the Philippines. So, looking at all these bewildering
political organizations, just think of it as a series of anti-communist confederations of largely
independent countries as an overlay, underneath which are the
component empires, commonwealths, associations, and entirely independent
countries that have linkages, partnerships, and relationships of their
own. As we'll see later on, these interests
could sometimes come into tension, when the goals of an anticommunist
confederation conflicted with the goals of a British Empire. To see how that conflict between
confederation and empire could play out, let's look at this map published in 1956.
Over here you see Egypt, which had had a British military
protectorate, but in 1952, a group of Egyptian military
officers throw out the king who'd been ruling as an ally of the British and claim Egypt is for the
Egyptians. If this sounds a lot like the turmoil of
1881 and 1882 in Egypt, you're right. In 1882, that led to a British invasion of
Egypt to sort out the turmoil and protect the Canal.
And a similar crisis would recur in 1956. We'll come back to that. But for now, just think about the way the
Americans thought of this problem. The British think of the turmoil in Egypt
as a threat to the Empire, a threat to the
Canal. The Americans think of this as a threat to
the anti-communist confederation because they would like the Egyptian nationalists to be part of that
confederation. They want to support Arab nationalism because Arab nationalism could be anti-
communist. So, the Americans want to be friends with these new Egyptian leaders, like Colonel
Gamal Abdel Nasser. As the Americans are trying to be friends
with Nasser, the British are looking for ways
to depose him. There's the Egyptian problem right there,
mid-1950s. Look right over here at Iran. Iran is struggling to regain
a full measure of independence. In the mid-1940s, the crisis was to push
out the Russian occupiers. The British troops left, but the British
retain a controlling interest in Iran's oil supply in this part of the country,
through the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company. A nationalist leader of Iran comes to the
fore, a liberal named Mohammad Mosaddegh, determined to nationalize the oil
interests, take over the oil industry for the benefit of the
Iranians. Puts them squarely into conflict with the
British. Again, the Americans are torn. On the one hand, they don't agree with the
British on the oil issue, and they want to support Mosaddegh
as someone who might be anti-communist. But, on the other hand, the British are their key partners in standing up to
communism in Europe and in other parts of the world. So, the goals of the anti-communist
confederation are running into the goals of the British Empire, which is part
of that same confederation. Complicated enough? Mosaddegh understood these complications, 
and this liberal leader of Iran pushed the issue hard. Here's, Mosaddegh, who Time magazine 
proclaimed their Man of the Year in 1951. Here he is on the cover of Time in
January 1952. You see, he oiled the wheels of chaos. This is not an entirely favorable
depiction. And notice the picture in the background: a fist of national assertion over here in
Egypt, where the canal is. Another fist of national assertion over
here in Iran, where all these oil derricks are dotting
the landscape. Mosaddegh, himself, was an interesting,
somewhat eccentric, figure. Definitely a nationalist. Definitely in favor of reducing foreign
influence, but not a brutal military autocrat in the model we've seen
in so many other countries. He's genuinely, in some ways, like some of
the liberal politicians of an earlier era,
looking for parliamentary solutions, looking for negotiations and a peaceful
way out, but his rhetorical stand is very
strong. This is part of what makes his cause so appealing to many Americans, yet also
so vexing. They worry he'll become a pawn of
communists who will be trying to take advantage of the turmoil
in Iran. In early 1953, under the new Eisenhower administration, finally the
Americans decide to quit quarreling with the British about
Iran and go along with them as they both plot to
overthrow Mosaddegh and put back in the old ruling family in the
person of the young shah of Iran, living in exile
in Rome. That coup in 1953 didn't keep the British from losing control of their oil interests
in Iran. It did make Iran a member of the
anti-communist confederation... for awhile. Embedded in these different partnerships,
politically and economically, devastated Europe and
devastated Japan are reborn in these postwar years. The 1950s and into the 1960s are still
looked back on with some nostalgia in both Western Europe and
Japan as the great boon years. Part of what's creating this boon is a bewildering alphabet soup of
organizations. It's worth taking a moment to go through
them. What does GATT mean? GATT is the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade. This is a multilateral organization for negotiating the terms of lowering trade
barriers. The Economic Cooperation Administration is
the institutional heir to the Marshall Plan. It's the organization for distributing the
aid that required the Europeans to work
together and leads very quickly to a European Payments Union, in which the
Europeans are coordinating their financial system to lower their own
internal trade and financial barriers to each other, one of the
conditions to Marshall aid. Western Europe is becoming a collective
political entity, a kind of political and economic
association. The French Foreign Minister and the French planner,
Jean Monnet, joined together with the West Germans for a historic step, this acronym,
the European Coal and Steel Community. Think about it. In an age when coal and steel were still
seen as the barometers of national military power, France and
Germany, those ancient enemies, are going to pool
multinational control of those vital resources. That's becoming the new wave of the future
in the Europe of the 1950s. Here's Monnet and Schuman working together
in the beginning of the 50s. Here's Time Magazine celebrating Monnet's
achievement. You see that cheerful Frenchman depicted
in this Time Magazine cover of 1961. You see all the different flags in the background and the byline: New
Strength for the West. Europe unites in the common market, or more technically, the European Economic
Community. But it is worth pausing and reflecting on
what a break this is from everything we've been seeing in the story
of European history up to this point. So, you have the anti-communist
confederation, NATO, layered on top of a new European Economic Community that
brings those countries together, and you see the ingredients: security, prosperity, organizational pathways for
their rebirth, their renewal in the world economic system
and a European economic system. Something similar also happens in East
Asia: What I call here a SCAPanese model.
What's SCAP? SCAP is the acronym for the Supreme
Command of the Allied Powers. That was the allied occupation authority
in postwar Japan. SCAP and the Japanese worked together to
create a new model Japanese constitution, very much
influenced by liberal and social democratic models. Is it any surprise then that the ruling
party in Japan for generations called itself the
Liberal Democratic Party or LDP. Here is the Japanese prime minister,
Yoshida Shigeru, who had been a pre-war politician beaten down
by the militarists. He's now in charge of the new SCAPanese
postwar Japan. Yoshida, here, is signing a treaty of San
Francisco in April of 1951. This treaty settles the war time issues
between Japan and her former enemies. The Soviet Union didn't take part, but you can see other former enemies that are
there, including the United States, represented
here by the American Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, and the
chief American envoy who had worked on the negotiations,
John Foster Dulles, who had become President
Eisenhower's Secretary of State. So, as Japan finds the solution to its security problems in a political and a
military alliance with the United States, Japan is also at the hub of a new East Asian Economic
Community. Not the kind of exclusive imperial
economic community that Japanese militarists had envisioned
in the 1930s, this one is between sovereign states.
So, again we're back at our map of the world of 1956.
Think of Japan, then, as the economic and security hub of all kinds of outward investment and cooperation with the offshore economies of
East Asia: in Korea, the Philippines, Hong Kong,
South Vietnam, Indonesia, uniting them in a trade and financial
network that then spans the Pacific, with the United States
as a critical market for exports, because the United
States is now playing the free trade role that Britain had
played in the 1800s. Happy to accept imports from other
countries, even if those other countries weren't
necessarily as open to imports in return,
understanding that those countries' economic development would be important to
general economic prosperity for everyone. The results are significant. This is a chart of per capita GDP, production per person, in some different
countries and regions. The United States is at the top and
between 1946 and 56 grows steadily. Western Europe, coming from a lower base, is
growing at an even more rapid rate up to 1956. And that's headed to continue. You see here the Soviet Union, and you
have a lower base still, devastated by the war, growing
somewhat slowly, but moving forward. Japan, down even lower, also beginning to
grow again, at the same pace as the Soviet
Union. What's hard to visualize in the 1950s is
that Japan, which still seemed like a very poor
country in the 1950s, is about to cross over the
Soviet Union's progress and begin moving rapidly up
towards high income status. That will happen really in the 1960s and
�70s. But the seeds have been laid for it
already. If you look down here at this chart, you
see South Korea in the Mid-1950s, still not taking off yet.
Their take-off will happen later. This is still a desperately poor and
war-ravaged country during the 1950s, getting a lot of foreign aid from
the United States. China and India, both very, very poor,
having trouble taking off. India under democratic socialism, and
China under Mao's rule. Well one of the things that you'll notice then from this complex story of partnerships, institutions,
associations is the growth of a kind of consensus politics, again the
relationships between big government, big business, big unions which also creates a
kind of consensus economics that's created the whole class warfare environment of the
first half of the twentieth century. We traced a little bit of the story as to
how this happened. The development of different kinds of
political parties and ideologies, different kinds of institutions that
require a lot of cooperation. Now, let's just think for a moment. Why did it happen? Clearly part of that answer has got to be
the experience of the Second World War. A sense that we can't, we won't, go back
to the politics of extremes. We can't, won't go back to the politics of
dictatorships, at least in some of these countries, which is what makes consensus politics,
with all of its materialism and unsatisfactory
compromises, still seem more appealing than the alternatives. In the mid-1950s, the communist world
wasn't static, either. In 1953, Stalin died. This produces results in two ongoing
wars. The Korean War had been a stalemate for
years. Now, with Stalin dead, with the new
Eisenhower administration threatening to escalate the war if it's not brought to a
successful conclusion, American power seeming stronger now, the North
Koreans and their Chinese backers decide to go ahead and sign an armistice
agreement, not a peace treaty, just a suspension of hostilities.
That suspension of hostilities froze the old battle lines in place along
a demilitarized zone, where the old warring sides still confront
each other today. The peace precariously holding now after
more than 60 years of armistice. In Indochina, the war between the French and the
Viet Minh, who'd been trying to throw the French out, comes to a conclusion at a big international conference in 1954 in
Geneva. The outcome of that conference was an
agreement that the French would leave, Vietnam would
hold elections. The elections are never held. Instead what happens is, in the North, where the Communist Vietnamese were
strongest, they created new state called North Vietnam. In the southern part of Vietnam, a new state is created called the Republic of
Vietnam. What a lot of people were beginning to
wonder then, in the mid-1950s, is, in the aftermath of
Stalin's death, with some resolution of these
conflicts, could there be a wider opportunity for a thaw in the Cold
War. There's some really important turnovers in
the leadership of the international communist movement. In Western Europe, communism was still a
powerful movement with a lot of long-time followers, people
who had believed deeply in communism as an answer to the great
turmoils and struggles of their youth. They more and more becoming a community of
outsiders, though, in their countries. There are a few other communists, like
those in Yugoslavia, that try to espouse an
independent path, led by a long time communist fighter who
had taken the name Josip Broz Tito, T-I-T-O. They say we're
going to find an independent path, independent of the Soviet Union. There was
some real danger for years that Stalin would invade Yugoslavia, or
somehow get Tito out of the way. But Stalin dies, Tito survives, and puts
in place a kind of authoritarian state capitalism that's a little more like a mix between communism and democratic
socialism. In the Soviet Union itself, there is a renewed burst of attention to modernist
development, to great new land development
projects, hydro-electric projects, other things that will help take the Soviet
Union into modern development. There's a lot of sharing of technical
expertise, industrial expertise, with China, really kind of a warm period
there in the mid-1950s in Soviet-Chinese relations.
Here you see one of the relatively few happy moments between the new Soviet
leader, Nikita Khrushchev and Mao Zedong. But many old communists wonder whether
these new communists are still committed to the global revolution and to the
triumph of the communist cause, whether they're still as committed to the overthrow of capitalism, reactionaries, and
imperialists. That's the question Khrushchev faces when
he decides to take on the legacy of Stalin in 1956. Here again our old friends at TIME
Magazine, through their website, are doing a wonderful job of trying to graphically portray what Khrushchev
represents. This is a cover from April 1956 for
Russia's Khrushchev. The occasion was Khrushchev was paying a
visit to London. Alright, so here's the suspicious British
lion eying their Soviet visitor. You see the Kremlin Tower is being
represented here with this happy smiling face, in his right hand he's
holding a bouquet of roses [LAUGH] and behind his back, in his
left hand, is a spiked club with the portrait of Stalin
apparently being trampled underfoot. So what do you make of this visitor to the
West? Khrushchev is a blend of contradictions.
Impulsive, earthy, even crude at times.
From humble beginnings. No experience in world travel. A lot of experience in the upper levels of
the Soviet Communist Party. He'd survived all the purges.
He'd gotten through the war years, he'd been involved in the
worst of the Stalin years, but he hoped for
other things. He had high hopes for what the Soviet
Union could become, was sure that it could catch up and even get ahead of
the West in its economic development. He wanted to concentrate on domestic
affairs, but at the same time, he also wanted to
show that the Soviet Union was strong, that he
was militant. That he'd demonstrate his strength, his certainty that he was tougher than the
Western leaders were, would lead him to make some pretty fateful
choices in the coming years. Now, contrast, though, Khrushchev with Mao
Zedong. If anything, Mao Zedong now feels that if
had been Stalin's junior partner, he really should be the elder statesman
when it comes to someone like Khrushchev. Mao feels like he's had as much experience
in leading and building a revolution as Khrushchev has had, and that this now
needs to be a relationship of equals. Indeed, it's not too long before Mao
begins telling Khrushchev, you need to share with us your nuclear
weapons technology. You need to give us the nuclear bomb so that we can stand up to the United
States, just like you are. Khrushchev is increasingly uneasy about
that. That's a little bit of the background as
we get into the crisis year of 1956. Khrushchev convenes the 20th congress of
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and he delivers a long, extraordinary
speech recounting the crimes of Stalin. This secret speech soon became public, and
even if those crimes were presented in a milder form than we
might discuss them today, you can imagine the sensational impact this had for people trained to respect party orthodoxy, party discipline, and who
themselves had almost all been involved in some of
these activities at one level or another. Mao's reactions to Khrushchev's secret
speech was to give a carefully guarded speech of his
own, in which he said that Stalin had to be
carefully evaluated. There was both good and bad.
He tended to think that 70% good and 30% bad. Mao is really deciding that he needs to
embark on his own path, that Khrushchev's approach is unstable and
maybe not sufficiently revolutionary. He holds his own party congress at which
he announces that actually, in China, class struggle has been brought to an end.
China can move forward for real communism. Mao is actually about to lead a revolution
inside China itself and in its relationships with all China's
neighbors. Think about the reaction to Khrushchev's
speech in Eastern Europe, in places like Poland and Hungary. Well, the reaction there was that we too
can find an independent path, that the Soviets won't kill us in order to
keep us part of the empire. In both Hungary and Poland, communist rulers try to embark on a
different path, and they both soon find the limits of
Soviet tolerance. In Hungary, this actually produces an invasion of the country by Soviet
soldiers. Tens of thousands of people are killed in
the ensuing violence, as Hungary is brought firmly back into the
empire, along with Poland. It's difficult for people who don't take
communist beliefs seriously and understand their
world to understand the extraordinary tension
and friction of a year like 1956 for the millions of
followers of international communism. One voice that helps us understand that a
little bit better is the memoir of a famous British historian,
world historian, named Eric Hobsbawm. Here he is in this illustration depicted
as the eternal Hamlet, uncertain, undecided, as
he contemplates the globe.
So, here's Hobsbawm on 1956: Difficult to reconstruct not only the mood but also the memory of that traumatic
year. Even after half a century, my throat
contracts as I recall the almost intolerable tensions under
which we lived month after month, the unending moments of decision about
what to say and do on which our future lives seem to
depend. Friends now clinging together or facing
one another bitterly as adversaries. In 1957, Khrushchev will move internally
against his political opponents who are
criticizing him both as not being revolutionary enough or as not moving enough on domestic
development. The anti-party faction, the anti-rightist
faction, he has to put both of them down. Though to Khrushchev's credit, he breaks
with Stalin in another way: His opponents are exiled, not shot. As you can tell, these years were a
potential turning point for the whole future of
world communism. We've seen how the world of capitalism had
in a way reordered itself, reorganized itself around new
ideals, new institutions, renewed itself. What's happening in world communism? It's being challenged from within.
There's a lot of tension. Will it embark on a different path, reinvent its
ideology, become something else, maybe some new
amalgam between old communism and democratic socialism that might have a
different, or broader, appeal? But fundamentally communism comes out of
this period of crisis torn by another internal
crisis: Khrushchev versus Mao, and that
competition for the leadership of the international communist movement
keeps both of them on the more radical, revolutionary,
coercive path. Revolution crushed in Hungary. Mao leading a revolution inside China and
confrontation with others outside China. And perhaps a potential turning point was
lost. Now, in this presentation I've
concentrated overwhelmingly on kind of the worlds of the West, metaphorically,
though it includes Japan, for example, and the East, which we might think of as
the communist world. Again, metaphorically. But now let's look at that Third World that people talked so much about in the
1950s. Let's look at the rest. [BLANK_AUDIO]