Hi.
Welcome back. In this presentation, we'll talk about
another creation of the 1950s: The Third World. A focal point is the Suez Crisis of 1956.
Just give you a little background.
In 1956 remember, there is a US-led, anti-communist confederation.
[SOUND] Members of the confederation include the British Empire, French Empire. So then here's the dilemma: How does the United States reconcile its
anti-communist goals with the imperial goals of these
empires? Because the United States is worried that
these empires' imperial interests are creating colonial rebellions that are
playing into the hands of the communists. So the United States kind of wants to be
on the side of aspiring nationalists for the sake of its anti-communist
confederation that puts it in conflict with the empires. On the other hand, if they undermine the
empires too much, they've undermined the strength
of their allies. So, you see the tension. The tension came to a head in the Suez Crisis of 1956, while these empires were
still strong. The French Empire had just suffered a
bitter defeat, in 1954, losing Indochina. But the French government was locked in an
intense struggle to retain Algeria, its North African department of France.
The setting for the crisis is that there's an independent government
in Egypt, led by a former Egyptian military officer,
Gamal Abdel Nasser. Nasser is determined to take control of
the Suez Canal and its revenues as a way of shoring up the
finances of his state. He's obliged the British to withdraw their
forces from Egypt, forces that had been there since
the occupation of Egypt in 1882, a crisis that had also
arisen over a dispute over the Suez Canal. Here's the scene. Newly created state of Israel here,
separated from Egypt by an armistice line. A lot of tension between the Egyptians and
the Israelis. Now the Egyptians have taken on the
British. The French don't like Nasser's Egypt
either because they think Nasser is supporting the
Algerian rebels. The British, on the other hand, see
Nasser's nationalization of the Suez Canal as a threat to cut one of their
historic imperial lifelines. By the way, here is a British cartoonist
giving you the English perspective on what Nasser
has done. This is D.A. Low's caricature. That's Nasser there, standing athwart the
canal [LAUGH], The Colossus of Suez, waving the
flag of Arab nationalism, obstructing the great vessel of
international communications. Meanwhile, over here on the left, fishing
in troubled waters, is the Soviet minister, Shepilov.
What happens then is that the British and French secretly collude with the
Israelis so that all three countries will launch a joint military occupation that
will seize the Suez Canal while the Israelis attack Egypt
in Sinai. Here's a map that shows you the air
attacks, which were then followed by the landings of troops as the Israelis rushed
across Sinai in the last days of October 1956. So what happened? Was it a replay of 1882?
Did Egypt get reoccupied one more time? No. In fact, just the opposite conclusion from
1882. The British and the French had to climb
down. The British had to undertake a humiliating
withdrawal. The British government collapsed. The Israelis were forced to withdraw from
Sinai and go back to their territory. Why? Because the American government insisted
on this withdrawal. And the American government pressured the British,
squeezing its economy through the British reliance on American support for them in
the international financial system. This was a bitter pill for the British and
French, but they had to swallow it. The significance of the crisis was great. For the West, at one level, it meant the Americans had reaffirmed the
centrality of the anti-communist confederation and had tried to reach out
to nationalists. On the other hand, it meant that the British and French began looking
towards the dismantlement of their empires as
something that was inevitable, and the process of
decolonization accelerated rapidly. Meanwhile, too, giving up their imperial
identities, the British and French governments more and
more start looking at an alternative European
identity, and maybe a European identity that pushes the United
States at arm's length. There's certainly a lot of residual
hostility toward the United States coming out of this crisis, among both
British and French conservatives. For the Soviet Union, the Suez Crisis
opened what was already for them an opportunity to be more
active in taking sides in the Middle East, finding
states who wanted Soviet arms supplies,
developing new allies. For a lot of the less developed countries,
Nasser seemed to them a great hero who'd stood up to the West,
who'd vindicated the cause of nationalism. He, as much as anyone, symbolized the new
power of the Third World. Alright.
The Third World, then, is that world of countries in between the members of the anti-communist
confederation led by the United States and the members of the
communist bloc led by the Soviet Union or by China. In between, the large, uncommitted middle,
so to speak, well, let's call that the Third
World. And indeed, some of the leaders of these
countries very much thought of themselves as a Third World, as
a non-aligned movement. In their minds, as well as the eyes of the US leaders, the Soviet leaders, the Third
World seemed so important. Whichever way the Third World swung, that
would determine the future balance of world power between
the rival blocs. So from the point of view of the superpowers, the Third World is very
important as objects. Objects either for new kinds of dependent relationships, patron-client
relationships, not formal colonies but junior partners on
one side or the other. Or the Third World were important objects
to them as experimental laboratories for
their ideas about development. American ideas about development,
communist ideas about development, a lot of which in the 1950's evoked notions of the construction of enormous new
infrastructure projects, dams to generate electricity, things like
that. Also, looking at Third World countries
again as objects, as geo-political locations, strategic pivots controlling
choke points to this or that place. Another way in which people in the West, in the developed countries, thought of the
Third World as objects is they thought of these peoples
as more authentic somehow, symbols of striving against hierarchical
oppression. Symbols of liberation. You remember, in one of the very first
presentations we had, in the very first week, I showed you the romanticized
portrait of a young man Captain Cook had brought back from the South Seas.
Omai. And the idealized image of this natural
person, perhaps in a way the 1960s equivalent of the
Reynolds portrait is this iconic image of Che Guevara as the
symbol of authenticity and liberation hanging in
thousands of college dorm rooms. What is important to underscore is that
the Third World seemed important. What was happening in these countries was
something people cared about. They followed it. You can see it on the covers of Time
magazine as we'll see. You can see it on the front pages of
newspapers. But now let's switch the perspective. Let's look at the Third World from their
point of view. Third World as subjects. If you were leading one of these
countries, Egypt, Indonesia, think about the issues you'd be facing. First of all, you'd want to distinguish
yourself as neither subservient to the East bloc or
the West bloc. And indeed, 1955, President Sukarno in
Indonesia hosts a great conference of a new non-aligned movement to give that
sense of identity, of separateness. Solidarity of the people who aren't
members of the bloc. Here are some of the leaders gathered in 1955 for that Bandung
Conference. You see Colonel Nasser of Egypt there in
the middle, leaders from some of the other Middle Eastern
countries in the front row. Here's a map that shows you the countries
that were represented at that conference. It's interesting to note that China rose
its hand and said that it, too, was part of the non-aligned
movement in 1955. Probably no one was a more important symbol for the Third World and for
non-alignment than Jawaharlal Nehru, the long-time prime
minister of India, there talking to Mahatma Gandhi,
who was assassinated by a radical Hindu
nationalist in 1948. Here's the way that Nehru was being
presented to the American people by Time magazine in this issue of 1949,
shortly after Indian independence. You can see it's a basically sympathetic
image. Prime Minister Nehru, the caption says, a hard climb.
A harder one ahead. We see the teeming masses ascending a slow
staircase toward the light. These countries, too, you're inheriting a
legacy that's an imperial legacy. They're shaped by imperial rule.
The whole contours of their country, a place called
India, a place called Indonesia, are shaped by the legacy
of imperial rule. The forms of government you've inherited,
a lot of the property laws, the court systems, the armies that you've
inherited, all shaped by imperial rule. Even the political vocabulary you're
adopting, including, by the way, the political vocabulary of
opposition to imperialism. Because all these people are shaped by the
anti-imperialist struggle, the rhetoric of that, the
ideology of that. So they're simultaneously both products of
imperial rule and products of the hatred of imperial
rule. So from the point of view of a leader of one of those countries, now what do you
do? Again, think about their problems.
Remember this old paradigm we've been talking about all semester
long. Situation, problem, solution. Think about some of the problems that these leaders face as they're making
choices. First, notice just the scale of all these
new countries coming into existence. Here's a map showing you the breadth of
the different colonies and mandates around the
world in 1939. The details are not so important.
You can just see all the colors though. Now, here's a map of decolonization after
1945, including the years in which these new countries
gained their independence. No need to go through this in detail. You can just look at this map for a minute
or so and simply see the scale of choices that are being
made by so many new leaders. Or you can look at this map from southeast
Asia on the end of Western rule there, again
with the dates. Or this map, showing decolonization in the
Caribbean. So again, what problems did they face? First, and this is a subtle point, easily
overlooked. Just basic fragility. The structures of some of these new states
are just really small. There might be one radio station, one
newspaper, and a small capital. Loyal army units you can count on, might
be one, two, three battalions. Several hundred soldiers in the capital
might make the difference for who is in power on a given
day. Because of all that fragility, you're
going to feel very conscious of what would it take for someone to
overthrow me and how easily foreigners might meddle and topple me if
they buy the right colonel, if they ally themselves with a
particular set of big businessmen. So this consciousness of fragility is always in
the minds of these leaders and also some of the foreign powers circling them, both worried about the fragility and tempted by
it. Another great concern for all these
leaders is going to be independence. They want to feel more independent. It's very easy from the point of view of
the developed countries to look out and say, well, this
country's my friend so it was part of a Soviet empire or
American empire. Believe me, if you begin to take the point
of view of the leaders of these countries, they had not thrown off
empire to become a part of a new empire. They're struggling to maintain their
independence as best they can, and they're trying to manipulate the
foreigners to serve their interests. They're also of course almost all
concerned about modernization, catching up, lifting their people out of
poverty. This, of course, maybe gives some of them
the benefit of the doubt. You can cynically write off some of these
new leaders as corrupt people out for their
personal enrichment, but I think a common theme among many of these
countries is a desire for modernization, however
they define that term. This issue of modernization is so strong.
Let's dive more deeply just into that concept. If there are 80, 90 less developed
countries, all trying to figure out how do we
modernize, it's such a blank term.
What does it mean? What choices do they have to make? Let's study that for a second. If you were the leader, or among the
leaders of a new country, you're going to have to make
choices about the following subjects. Finance, that is, where do I get my money? If from the private sector, who controls
my big banks? To whom do the big banks give money? Do I let the banks decide that, or will my
government take control of the big banks, either formally or informally, in
order, to direct who gets access to credit in my
country? You also have to think about what's the relationship of my government to key
industries. Let's say my country, my key industries are plantations that grow
certain commodities, like rubber, valued by the outside world
or mines, for, say, tin or copper. Who controls those industries?
Private firms, foreigners, the government?
Land. Who gets the land? Are you satisfied with the current
distribution of the land, or do you think you need to re-distribute the land
to give poor people more land holdings? What's your approach to trade? Do you like the kind of trading system
that the imperial power left you with? Do you want a freer trading system, or do
you want to raise barriers to trade? Wages. Do you just let the market set the wages,
or do you try to control what the wages will
be? Ditto for prices. Leave them alone, try to control them.
Or try to control some of them? In other words, do you let the market set
the price for bread? Do you let the market set the price for
gasoline? Because that'll cause a lot of problems
for poor people. If you subsidize those prices, where do
you get the money to do that? How do you then manage all the economics
that go with that? Now I know it might seem odd to put justice down as an aspect of
modernization, but, in purely economic terms, the system for
administering the justice is the system that guarantees property rights to
people who have property. So people who have property are going to
look very hard at the justice system to decide whether they
have rights they can protect. So as a leader of the new government, you
have to decide how the court system is going to be run.
Is it going to be truly independent? What kind of property rights will those
courts protect? Now if you just take a look at this list,
you can see, if you make choices under each of these
headings, you sure are going to define the character of your state, the character of
your economy and all kinds of political relationships and the
distribution of resources, who gets what, inside your new nation. Now, there are different
theories as to how to answer all those questions. For example, there would be a communist theory of how
to answer it. The great example of the communist
theories of modernization might be China. And of course, that theory would be, the government controls it all, all those
things on that list, and then the government
makes decisions as to how to help the people. Or you could look at some ideas from
democratic socialism. What would be some examples for that in
the late 1950s? India, might be one. Nehru regarded himself as a democratic
socialist. Mexico perhaps, might be another. And you'd look at those questions and the
answers would be, the state would control quite a lot of
that. The state would be involved in
redistributing land. The state would control key industries.
But the state would allow some significant scope for private property ownership, some
significant scope for market setting, wages, prices of some things.
But, a very heavy government role. And then, of course, a very heavy role
between the government and the people who ran
those vital industries, like say, the relation between the Mexican
government and the Mexican oil industry, which it had
nationalized during the 1930s. Another model for modernization might be this one, import-substitution
industrialization. One country that would be an illustration
of that approach, in this period, might be
Brazil. Now, what exactly do I mean by that? What would you do if you had I, an ISI
approach? Well, for instance, what you do is, you
would increase barriers to trade in order to develop your own native industries.
That means, low trade. That means increased local industry.
[NOISE] It means reducing local imports of foreign
goods. You want to reduce your reliance on
foreigners because you're not earning a whole lot of foreign exchange to use with
which to buy those imports. You know, it's worth going into just a
little bit of detail about some of this because this set of ideas was very
intriguing to a lot of the less developed countries in the 1950s and 1960s.
And that term, ISI, is worth remembering. Or, here's yet another approach you could
adopt. Export-oriented industrialization. Your models might be countries like, Japan, recovering from the devastation of
World War II, or South Korea, especially the South Korea
of the 1960s. If you adopted this export-oriented
industrialization approach, EOI, gee, what's implied by that?
Well, interestingly, your barriers to imports
might actually still be high, just like in the import
substitution approach. You would try to keep out foreign imports
as much as you could. Remember, the United States of America was
a protectionist country during the period of its early industrial development
in the late 1800s and early 1900s. So Americans shouldn't get on too high
horse about this. But, in the same time, you want high
trade, not low trade. How do you do that then?
Well, you depress wages. Try to keep workers' wages low. You also depress the real value of your
money, your currency. In other words, you keep your exchange
rates low. Why?
I want to manufacture goods cheaply. So my workers' wages are low, I keep the
value of my currency low so that rich countries are going to
think: That stuff that they're making is so cheap, I want to buy it. I want to buy it even though that country doesn't import many of my rich
country products. I resent that, but I still would just as soon make my consumers happier by buying
their cheap goods. And besides, politically, I'm willing to
kind of overlook the fact that they're keeping their trade barriers high because
they're my allies in an anti-communist
confederation. And then you understand some of the
bargain involved in American relations with Japan
and South Korea. And you say, well gee, that sounds like a
great idea. You have high trade. What's the problem with this? Well one problem, of course, is that you
are actually keeping the wealth of your own
people lower. The buying power of your people is being
consciously reduced in order to increase the sales of your goods
in foreign markets. Now that implies some potential political problems because, of course, the companies
that are making the exports, the people running those companies are making plenty of
money. But the workers actually working in the factories, well they're not making so much
money. After a while, that can begin to rankle. And that also helps define some of the
politics in South Korea and Japan in the 1970s and
1980s. And by the way, it helps define some of
the issues of the politics of a place like China today,
where the government and the big exporters are very close to each
other, but a lot of the workers who are working for the
exporters are increasingly unhappy. But let's suppose you don't like any of
these approaches to modernization because what you'd really prefer is a more classic liberal stance, along the
nineteenth century lines, and you just kind of want the
government to stay out of these matters. You want the government to confine itself
to a limited set of duties, keeping public order and the like, and only regulate the capitalist system to the minimum
extent necessary. That would be a liberal approach. One of the downsides of this, of course,
if you were opposing them, would be, well, you're not using the government to
keep the foreigners out. You're not using the government to
redistribute income to the people who don't have so much. So for them in practice it might seem like
a liberal ideology is just the way to preserve the rights of the rich
people and preserve social inequality. So you can see some of the arguments and
tradeoffs you're making both ways. But finally, suppose you're just a
dictator of your state, and you don't want to have to fuss with with all this complicated economic reasoning and worry so much about
modernization. You just want to be an old fashioned sort
of ruler. Well, then you can just fashion an old-
fashioned predatory state, really just like the ones that have been around
for thousands of years. And you figure out what in your country
makes money, and then you grab control of it and try to squeeze as much of it as
you can for yourself. And frankly, there are a number of states
in the world during this period and in the world today
in which the leaders essentially seize power, try to identify
something that makes money, grab control of it, and siphon as much as they
can for themselves. As I say, it's a very old-fashioned
pattern that doesn't really require much ideology
to figure it out. Okay. So now, Madame Third World Leader or Mr.
Third World Leader, you've been working through your problems of how fragile you are, how you want to maintain your
independence. You're working through all your theories
about modernization. You then still have some problems of: How
do I define my national community? Who gets what, how do I solve my distribution problems, my
politics problems? And what then you get is some really careworn Third
World leaders, who are having trouble holding
things together. You know, take for example this portrait
now of the worried, pensive, troubled Nehru in India in 1959, with, of course,
the Chinese dragon beginning to plant its claw across the
Himalayan mountains, eyeing his country. At least that's how Time magazine saw it. Of course, Time was always on the lookout for promising leaders in the new Third
World. Here Time is spotlighting for American
readers in 1953 Africa's Kwame Nkrumah in the Gold
Coast. It's part of Western Africa. In the dark continent, they ask, is he
dawn's early light? Or their spotlighting at the end of 1954,
the new leader of communist North Vietnam, Ho Chi Minh.
Or, you've already seen this cover before, in 1955, they're telling people
about Premier Nasser in Egypt. Or here, in 1958, during the struggles of
Algerians to free themselves from French rule, here's one of those Algerians involved in the revolutionary struggle,
Ferhat Abbas. In the background, those are French
paratroopers strolling the Casbah in Algiers looking
for insurgents. Or take a look at this cover. It's a very interesting one of a new
Kenyan leader in East Africa, Tom Mboya, in 1960.
Mount Kenya in the background. A form of traditional tribal life here
over on the left behind him, a Maasai
tribesman. Over here on the right, a member of the
white minority in a now independent Kenya. Mboya is looking out towards the future. Interestingly, this is a time at which the United States government was spending
money to bring promising young Kenyans to the
United States to get advanced degrees. One of those Kenyans who came to the United States in this year, when this
magazine was published, was a follower of Mboya named
Obama, who would become the father of an American
president. Now Mao Zedong in China is also interested
in these distribution problems, but his
approach is quite radically different. It's much more like what Stalin did in the early
1930s, when Stalin, in effect, engaged in a revolution at home to take land and food
away from the rural peasants and redistribute what they
had to the state and to the cities. Mao is doing the same thing while also
trying to organize an industrialization all
through the Chinese countryside where everybody could start converting their
farms into places where they would build kilns for the manufacture of
homemade iron implements. This Great Leap Forward caused a famine, as
Stalin's collectivization had caused a famine in
the early 1930s. Mao's Great Leap Forward in fact probably
caused the loss of a great many more lives even than were lost
in the Soviet Ukraine. Estimates are that the Great Leap Forward
probably cost at least 20 to 30 million lives lost because of starvation and malnutrition between 1958
and 1962. So that's one kind of distribution
challenge. Here's another kind of distribution
challenge, between different ethnic communities in the disparate
multi-lingual country called Indonesia. You'll remember this Time cover. This is from December 1946.
This showed you the new quote President Sukarno leading these
Indonesian independent strivers. See the picture there? He's actually a somewhat menacing
insurgent figure, yet in the background all these hands clasping towards a new
emblem of national independence. Alright, so that's Sukarno in 1946. Now let's see how Time features Sukarno 12
years later, in 1958. Here's a photograph of Sukarno, now the
somewhat weary, embattled president of a country that's being torn
apart by civil war. And in India, Nehru also is confronting
all sorts of issues of disputed territory and
separatist movements. This map gives you some sense of this.
As you look at this map, you'll see how that at the time British India
gained its independence in 1947, it was immediately partitioned into
two different states, India and Pakistan. Pakistan really being defined as its
identity as a Muslim majority nation.
But, Pakistan had national movements of its own between
Punjabis, Baluchis, frontier tribes, and a part of Pakistan here in the East
Bengal province. And in 1971, after another Indo-Pakistani conflict, East Bengal seceded from
Pakistan and created an independent country of its
own, which it called Bangladesh. So these countries are all confronting
internal turmoil that sometimes also turns into
international conflict. And from Time magazine's perspective, you
see how they're portraying Nehru at the end of
1962. India's lost illusions. Nehru, also weary, embattled, with the
figure of Mao in the background. One of the things I'm doing by just showing you all
these different images, I just want you to get a sense of the
variety of these people, the variety of the kinds of
problems that they were confronting, though they all have the same sorts of
questions they have to answer. One of the inspirational figures in the
Third World at the beginning of 1959 was this man, the young Fidel Castro, then
portrayed very flatteringly as the leader of a revolutionary movement,
the 26th of July movement, that had combined some
liberals, communists, everybody united against the aging
dictator, Batista, overthrowing him in early �59 and representing a lot of hope
for Cuba's future. Both Time magazine and the American
government would quickly become disillusioned with Castro
as they became convinced, correctly, that Castro was choosing a
communist model of development and modernization for
his country. So back again to the perspective of the
Third World leaders or people who cared about their
point of view. If you were again, Madame Third World
Leader, Mister Third World Leader, one of your
problems as you look at this menu of choices is:
How do I use these powerful foreigners? I might need foreign help for one thing or
another, for my security, for my economic life, but how do I manipulate them, use
them, while achieving my goals? So rather than view them through the lens
of puppets of one or another foreign power,
see this from their angle because, really, the
relationships of the great powers with all of these countries
are two-way relationships where each side has their goals for how
they work with the others. But these Third World issues fade into the
background in the first years of the 1960s as the world
becomes riveted by crises directly between the
United States and the Soviet Union and a genuine threat of a
global thermonuclear war. We'll come to that next.
See you then.