[BLANK_AUDIO] Hi, welcome back.
Make yourself comfortable. So, this week we're going to look at the
contemporary world. The world of the last 20 plus years. Let's start with the way the Cold War
ended, in the world of the early 1990s when the
term Washington Consensus passed into common usage because the United
States of America, for a time, seemed so central in providing some of the guiding
principals for this new order. Let's start with the postwar settlement. I put postwar in partial quotation marks
because the settlement was so radical, it did so much
to change the map of the world, it was the kind of settlement that ordinarily only happens
after a global cataclysmic conflict. But in this case, the postwar settlement came after and culminated a period of
peace, cold war to be sure, but it was arrived at peacefully, not as the aftermath of a
major war. That itself is worthy of note because the
terms were so significant. In a way, the postwar settlement is a kind of long delayed fruition of the
postwar vision of Franklin Roosevelt in the
closing years of World War II. What were some of the elements in Franklin
Roosevelt's vision? High on the list for him would have been international cooperation among the great
powers. To keep the peace, he imagined that the
great powers would work together as a kind of policemen
against rogue states. In fact, one expression used for it back
in the mid-1940s was to talk of hopes for the
four policemen. Back then, President Roosevelt thought
that the permanent members of the UN Security Council, the United States, the
Soviet Union, Britain, China, would become the four policemen,
the new great powers. He also had in mind a vision in which
there would be an open trading order. So, new institutions for international cooperation like the United Nations, with
real peacekeeping done by the great powers willing to use
force against rogue states, which FDR envisioned
as the four policemen back at the end of World War II. In a world characterized by open
economies. The extent to which this vision was
realized was very much a product of American
statecraft. The Americans had important allies on different issues in Europe, in
Asia, in Latin America. But it is worth just lingering for a
moment over some of the American architects of these new
structures at the beginning of the 1990s. Historians are coming more and more to
appreciate the quality of the statesmanship displayed between 1989 and
1992 by President George H W Bush, who was himself very much a product of the
World War II generation, really believed a lot
of the ideals about the postwar order from
someone who had grown to manhood while Franklin
Roosevelt had been president. His Secretary of State, the wily
negotiator, James Baker. His National Security Advisor, seasoned
veteran, a retired Air Force general, Brent Scowcroft. And perhaps the most important figure in
Baker's brain trust was this man, then in his 30s, Robert
Zoellick, Z-O-E-L-L-I-C-K, who most recently retired from a very good
tenure as the President of the World Bank. Some of the capstones of this new
structure were actually formal treaties. One, signed in Moscow, which was the final
settlement of the German question, the final settlement for Germany signed
in Moscow in September 1990. You see, there had never been a peace treaty with Germany signed after World War
II. The powers were going to negotiate a peace treaty, but their occupation
regimes then just developed into a divided Europe, with that peace treaty with Germany never
signed, with the final settlement of the future borders of a
German state never definitively settled. What the Moscow treaty of September of
1990 did is it finally tied off those issues of World War II in Europe
and the future of the German state. And then in November 1990, two agreements
signed in Paris, one of them a treaty on conventional armed forces in
Europe, called the CFE Treaty, that was the most ambitious arms
control treaty ever negotiated. It regulated the armies and air forces of all
the states in Europe, from the Atlantic Ocean to the Ural Mountains, and
how large they could be in that region. Nothing on this scale had ever
been attempted before. This treaty was actually negotiated and concluded in
November 1990 and did a lot to simply stabilize and put
in motion a military balance in which people didn't pay as much attention
to the military balance in Europe anymore. The other treaty signed in Paris was the
Charter of Paris. This is really an agreement on the
political and economic principles that all the European states felt should guide
them in their relations with each other and
inside their countries. Provisions about market economies,
democracy, and so forth. Basically, an agreement on the principles
on which the post-Cold War Europe should be
organized. With the signing of these treaties in the
fall of 1990, I believe the Cold War really had come to
an end, because the basic division of Europe, the
basic division of ideas between the two halves of Europe, had come
to an end, even though the Soviet Union would totter along for another year before it
disintegrated. Another thing that comes to an end with the end of the Cold War, is that
anti-communist confederation that I talked about first in
Week Twelve of the course, just a couple of weeks ago. Remember I said instead of thinking of this as an
American Empire, instead think of this as a league of
states organized around a common principle, of opposing communism,
with a particular central member of this league, this confederation, being
the United States of America. The anti-communist confederation was
embodied in several different kinds of security treaties, bilateral and
multilateral, and some institutions, like NATO, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization. With the end of the Cold War in 1990, really the anti-communist confederation
also comes to an end. The institutions, however, did not come to
an end, instead they morph into new purposes. NATO remains in existence because the states want to continue cooperating with
each other in this Atlantic community, but NATO
enlarges to pick up different members.
And becomes a place for political discussion and even some military
coordination for common purposes not related to the old communist threat at
all, but not as intense as it used to be. The European community, meanwhile, morphed
into a European Union, an ambitious experiment in organizing a new kind of
multinational state, inspired perhaps a tiny bit by the
precedent of the American Union that was created in
the late 1700s and that turned itself into a
more tightly organized federation during the
middle of the 1800s. So rather than a European Empire, a
European Union, keeping a lot of the national identities
of the states but also having some significant
sharing of sovereignty. This map just gives you a little bit of a sense of how the European Union had
expanded and was expanding. These areas here, in solid green, are the core of the old European
Community, the old Common Market. This had expanded to include Denmark, the
United Kingdom. At the end of the Cold War, it also
included places like Ireland. But then has expanded since then to pick
up places like Sweden, Finland, the rest of Germany, all these
states in east Central Europe, the Baltic Republics, Poland and so on. In fact Croatia, listed here as a
candidate member of the European Union, will be joining the European Union
in just a couple of months. Romania and Bulgaria. And so on. As the European Union expands, what's also
expanding with it is a required common notion of how to organize their governments on political democratic
principles and how to organize their economies on market
principals, with open markets and open movement of goods between them.
In 1991, a final aftermath of the end of the Cold War took
place. That was the end of the Soviet Union. In a way think about the Soviet Union as a
replacement for the Russian Empire. Here is a map of the Russian Empire as it expanded
up to the early 1900s. You see the enormity of the empire as it
was in 1914 over here in Europe, in the Caucasus, in Central
Asia, in the Far East. But the Russian Empire was organized as a
multinational empire. It was replaced by an empire organized on ideological
principles. A Soviet Union was a Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics. An old fashioned empire was replaced of a union of like minded republics all sharing
communist principles. As communism disappears as the glue
holding this union together, what will take its
place? The answer, increasingly by 1991, is
national principles will take its place, and the Soviet Union would
break up. Here's a map that shows you a little bit
of what happened with that break up. The dominant remaining state was a new
Russian Federation. Russia itself trying to compose a
multinational union. You see here the limits of the new Russian
Federation. These areas here, like Komi, are
constituent republics inside this Russian union, this
Russian Federation. But you can also see, Central Asia, all
these states become independent countries. The Caucasus, more independent nation
states. East Central Europe, more independent
nation states. If you were to compare this map of the
Russian Federation with old maps of the Russian Empire, you'd
see that the extent of the Russian domains
shrink back to an extent that had not been seen in nearly 300 years, since the middle of the
1700s. Ordinarily you would think that there must
have been a titanic war to cause such a shrinkage, but no, this
was handled largely peacefully. There were some wars and skirmishes on the
outskirts of the shrinking empire, but mainly the
changes were political upheaval, economic
upheaval, and social upheaval. These arrows showing you the movement of
ethnic Russians moving back from Central Asia into the
Russian Federation. Volga Germans being offered a chance to migrate actually back to German-speaking lands. Other kinds of migrations back and forth. Some Central Asians moving back into their
home republics, from homes inside Russia and so
on. Not only did the Soviet Union come to an end, but a series of new international
institutions also were added to the list in the early 1990s, helping to regulate
this new order. Let's look at some of the economic
institutions that become so important in the 1990s and the first decade of the
21st century. A World Trade Organization. Instead of just multilateral trade
agreements, there would actually be an international institution
to regulate the rules of free trade and to take appeals from countries that were complaining about
violations of trade agreements. That was the WTO, the World Trade Organization, which has been
remarkably successful. Inside North America, a North American
Free Trade Agreement, uniting the United States, Canada and Mexico in a
free trade area. In the Asia Pacific, an Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation Forum which, along with the Association of
Southeast Asian Nation States, provided international institutions to
talk about political and economic issues among a number of the states in the
Asia-Pacific region. Again, institutions international for
international cooperation, assuming that the world was not divided into rival great power
blocks anymore.