[BLANK_AUDIO] Hi.
Welcome back. In this presentation and the next one, I'm
going to try to pull together a lot of ideas that we've been
discussing over the entire course. One of them, using a phrase I've used
earlier in the course, is to talk again about the issue of the
global and the local. So, a lot of this course has been about outside forces and their significance.
Just to, kind of graph it, imagine that you have a
primary community. That primary community is being buffeted,
especially in the 1700s on, but above all, 1800s, 1900s, primary communities everywhere in the
world are interacting with distant states, distant markets, that
are then changing their economies to either get stuff from distant
markets or sell stuff to distant markets, putting people into
different sorts of jobs. They're seizing on, infected by, gripped
by all kinds of distant ideas. They're picking up on different kinds of
distant technology, and so communities are being altered, modified,
all by these kinds of interactions. And we've given you a lot of illustrations
about the way these outside forces have had a tremendous effect on
what might seem to be domestic stories. Like, take for example, American slavery
and America's Civil War. But American slavery does not survive and is not so strong except for
the fact that American slavery is producing cotton that is desired by the
entire world once it is converted into textiles in mills,
above all, in England. So the South, its slave economy, is effectively revitalized by British
industry and the creation of a world economy in
textiles for which the South is providing the essential
raw material through its labor supply of slavery. If not for that global setting, American
slavery would probably have been withering during the early 1800s,
just as slavery was withering away to its disappearance in the British
West Indies, where sugar plantations are no longer so profitable,
slavery is no longer so interesting. The British just abolished slavery by the
1830s. But, in the American South, the issue in
1860 for secession is not whether to eliminate slavery.
The issue is whether slavery can expand. And it was the North's decision that it was going to limit the further expansion
of slavery that so offended the Southern states that
they were determined to secede from the Union, rather than live in a
country that wouldn't let slavery continue to expand. The global context, though, is the only way
of understanding that. It's the only way of understanding why the Southern states thought they might win a
civil war. It's because well, we have a lot of money. The world needs us. Countries like Britain are bound to
recognize our independence struggle. So outside forces are indispensable to
understanding an American Civil War. And yet as we also pointed out, the
American Civil War, in turn, is an outside force interacting
with arguments in Europe. Arguments about: Will liberalism work? Can that American Republic, can that
strange republican experiment, the largest
republic ever created on Earth, can that really flourish or is
the Civil War then the finish: Yeah, we knew a republic on that scale
could not survive, it was bound to break up and
collapse. So the outcome of the American Civil War
plays into those European arguments which are also arguments that filter
around the rest of the world too. Switch over to China. The huge war in China, in the middle of
the 1800s and the 1850s and 1860s, is the Taiping Rebellion, led by Hong
Xiuquan. But Hong Xiuquan, the Taiping Rebellion,
again can only be understood in a global
setting. He has basically mutated Christian ideas
he's picked up in order to create a kind of challenge to
Chinese authority. Why does he think that challenge to
Chinese authority might work? Why, because Chinese authority had just
been so strikingly challenged by foreign outsiders, the whole appearance of
invulnerability, invincibility of the Qing Dynasty had been shattered by those
foreign gunboats. So, the empire looks weak, more
vulnerable, embarrassed. Ideas about alternative ways of living have worked their way into Chinese
life. They take them into their form. They create a challenge to the Qing. What results is an enormous war in which
millions of people die. Again, outside forces interacting with the
local community to produce the phenomenon we're
describing. If you look back at something like the Great Depression, big event in
American history. But can we explain the causes of that
event in American history without looking at
things in Europe? No. Or even our own Great Recession that we've
just gone through. But not just an American story, happening
in Europe, happening in other parts of the
world. And its ultimate causes don't really make
sense until we see global imbalances and the workings
of global capitalism. So you need the global story to explain a lot of
critical local events. But on the other hand, if you just have the global stories and those macro
perspectives, and you think the local interactions don't
matter, then you miss a lot of other things, too. You need the local side, too. So what the course is showing you, in
addition to the context of global local
interaction, we're showing you also just a lot of
straightforward material interactions. Just important that tens of millions of Europeans are on the move during the
1800s. That tens of millions of Mexicans are on
the move during the 20th century, many of them to
the United States. That millions of people in Asia are moving
around. Tens of millions of Chinese moving into communities of Southeast Asia. Material interactions, military
interactions. But also the sense that the world gives people of the possibilities in their own
community. It's that what we can do here, the kinds of things we can build, the kinds of
societies we can build, the whole menu of
possibility is being enriched by what we know is going on
around the world. So, lots of different kinds of outside
forces. Now, take that narrative of global, local
interaction that I've just spent some time
recapitulating for you. Now contrast that with some of the stock
narratives of world history, that you'll encounter in books on the
shelf of any local store. One such narrative: outsiders = exploiters. They're pretty bad.
That basically, innocent, good primary communities who are afflicted and
persecuted, manipulated, exploited by the greedy outsiders.
So, a narrative of exploitation. Or, there's another narrative:
The outsiders are guides. They're benevolent. They're teachers, instructors, they're
guides, that's another narrative. It's the narrative of the liberal
imperialists, and you can reverse that and go back and say yes, you think you're guides, but in fact, of course, you're really patronizing
hypocrites, et cetera, et cetera. But, so you have the exploiter narrative,
the guide narrative, you can run ironic contradictions back
against both of them. A third kind of fairly common narrative
you will find is narratives of determinism,
especially like material determinism. For instance, works like the outstanding
geographic work by Jared Diamond, Guns, Germs, Steel,
which if you read it, you'd think the whole course
of human history is pretty well set, gee, if not by 1500, maybe even centuries
before. Pretty much everything that's going to
happen is predetermined by the allocation of
material goods. Where's the coal? Where are the places where you can grow
certain kinds of plants? Based on the material circumstances, world
history was bound to unfold in the way it did. Now I, though, must admit that when I look
at that story. I think that that's very powerful.
But I think it takes you only so far. I think you still have a lot of variation
to explain. Variation among both winners and losers. Even the countries that do well,
but not everybody does equally well. Not all European countries do equally
well. Not all of them are fortunate, and even
some of the fortunate ones have their ups and
downs. They have a lot of variation to explain. There are also variations among the
losers. Just look at the variations in performance in Africa, in
Southeast Asia, in Northeast Asia, in the history of Latin America, between
the history of a country like, say, Chile and the history of a country like Mexico,
or between Chile and Argentina. A lot of variation to explain. In some ways, to me, the variations and
explaining the variations is the most interesting part of the story.
Remember in Week One of the course, we talked about a lot of history really being
a balance between choice and circumstance. You do have to understand the
circumstances. You do have to analyze the pre-existing
conditions. Just like the card player, you start by
looking at the cards in your hand. But the outcome of all card games is not
simply determined by the original deal. Another kind of narrative, though, is to
think about the global-local interactions as
narratives of partnerships. These sorts of narratives are rarer, but I think, in many ways, they're more
valid. Like the relationship of Britain and
India. It's not just of the British take over
India and run everything. There's some of that. But really what happens there is the
creation of an Anglo-Indian partnership in which Indian soldiers, Indian bankers,
Indian businessmen are running a lot of the key enterprises,
providing the manpower, the capabilities, and their role in the partnership requires the British to make certain choices,
certain decisions. True, then, you have shifting terms in
these partnerships. Maybe for a while one side is clearly the
senior partner, another side is the junior partner. But then the insight would be that when
you look at decolonization, it's not a black and white story in which
white is now black. Decolonization becomes a recalibrated
partnership in which the partners become more equal,
or the British become junior partners but still very involved in
activities in the country. Say like the role of the French in parts
of Africa today. And there's still other kinds of
narratives. Narratives about settler creations.
For instance, in places like North America, much of Russian Central Asia,
Australia, where the outsiders overwhelm the local inhabitants,
really define the communities. Those may seem like settler creations, the
slate that they're building on though is not an
entirely clean slate. There are still interactions with the
local peoples who remain. But even the whole environment has been
changed by the activity of settlement. Take the example of North America. It's not just that the people moved there.
They bring horses to North America. [LAUGH] Indeed, Indian tribes, like the Comanches,
developed for a while, for a couple of generations, an empire based on
horses brought by the Spanish. That's a different kind of interaction. Or a lot of the crops and grasses, the
plants of North America are actually, many of them,
imports brought over as well. You're changing the actual physical
environment of a lot of these places, in these settler
creations, again through the interactions, not just of people, but
of animals and even bacteria. Now, we shift gears a little bit.
You have the story in which in the 1800s, looks like some sets of
outsiders, especially powerful Europeans and then powerful North
Americans, they seem especially dominant. So the logical culmination of that should
be the vision of George Orwell's 1984. Orwell writes 1984 right after World War II. The United States already has the atomic
bomb. It's obvious to him that a few other countries
will get the atom bomb, too. They will have overwhelming power.
So, naturally, you'd expect that the world will be divided up into just a few empires
run by the really powerful societies. After all, don't the powerful people always
conquer the weak people? So here's a map of the world that's
envisioned by George Orwell in 1984. In his world, really, that you've got
these managerial states. These truly super powers that have
carved up the world between them. Oceania, Eurasia, Eastasia, and then some disputed territories. In his fictional
vision, these superstates fight it out, because they have all the power and they
dominate everybody else. But that's not what happened.
Why not? Why didn't the world just turn out to be dominated by just a handful of these
extraordinarily powerful empires? The world was not partitioned at points
that, perhaps, it could have been. For instance, in 1900 it was not
partitioned. China was on the verge of being carved up.
The last really huge state. Just in the same terms you could have
imagined, why wasn't China carved up the same way Africa had been carved up and
partitioned in the 1880s and 1890s. It wasn't that the Chinese were more
powerful than the Europeans. It wasn't that some of the Europeans
hadn't developed narratives to justify themselves
in doing it -- there were all sorts of narratives.
It didn't happen. We spent some time on why it didn't
happen. A peculiar combination of circumstances. Partly diminishing appetite for expansion,
interestingly. You have think about that. Why did their appetite diminish? Maybe they weren't just as greedy,
uniformly greedy as we assumed. The disruptive role played a little bit,
for a while, by the United States at a key
point. The rivalries of the European powers among
each other so that the Britain's then link up with the Japanese to try to
block Russian expansion in China. Again, in 1940, the world is not
partitioned. This is a point at which the totalitarian empires clearly have the upper hand in the
balance of world power. If the Soviets, Germans, Japanese, and Italians had worked together they probably
could have carved up the world very much on the
lines of Orwell's vision. But that didn't happen either.
Why not? Coalitions of new kinds were built.
The empires fell out among each other. Perhaps out of Germany's complacency.
And instead there were titanic wars between the totalitarians in which
some of the democratic states took sides. And you get a very different and more
complex result. What about in 1956?
Remember 1956? Non-communist world, communist world,
restless developing countries, some of them breaking free of colonial
rule. 1956: Egypt challenges. Britain and France invade Egypt. Looks like the empires are reasserting
themselves. No question the British and French are
stronger than the Egyptians. So why didn't the British reoccupy Egypt,
just like they occupied it in the 1880s? Because the Americans made them leave.
Why did the Americans make them leave? The Americans certainly were stronger than
the Egyptians, too.
The Americans were allies of the British. Something else is going on here. Something else having to do with the way
these countries thought of their goals, thought of their
identities, thought of themselves. It's not just an insatiable appetite for
power over other countries. There are some other ideals that are going
on, and they matter. Think, too, now, flip it away from the side of the
great powers. Think about it from the side of some of the countries that felt victimized by
great powers. Take the Chinese case, for example. China survives, because China is
resilient. It just barely holds together into the
early 20th century. Despite a half century of chaos and civil
war, and partly due to the wars among other
powers, China survives. But it survives in part because people
want China to survive. The United States goes to war with Japan
in 1941, in part, because the United States wants
China to survive. It doesn't want the Japanese to run China. If the United States was okay with the
Japanese running China, world history would have
looked a lot different. When the United Nations is created, a seat
was set aside, at American insistence, on the United Nations Security Council, the
great power table, for China to occupy. The Americans are insisting on that in
1943, when hardly anyone outside of the United
States thinks of China as a great power, but the
Americans say that seat has to be reserved for them. It's a seat now occupied by the People's
Republic of China, not quite the Chinese government
the Americans had envisioned occupying that seat in 1943 and 1944, but
there it is. And, in turn, the Chinese, looking at the
outside world, seeing the outside forces, pushing back against them,
adapting, too. Or, you can contrast the Chinese case with
the Japanese case. From a much earlier point of view, the Japanese adapted,
co-opting some Western ideas, retaining some of
their own. And in turn they very quickly, within one generation, themselves become one of the
great powers. Or, try out instead the Turkish case, and
the Iranian case in the 1920s. Beset by outside forces that they don't
like, again, they pick up on some of the outside forces but
decide to reinvent their national communities in
order to preserve a national community, or a community of some
kind, in their image. This, too, is a kind of adaptation in
which the local reacts to the global to create its
own kind of identity. That give you a much more complicated
world than the world that Orwell had postulated in his
work of fiction. So, now let me turn to another set of
ideas. What consists of modern thinking? What kinds of ideas dominate the way we
think about the modern world for the future and the 21st century, as we
look back over 250 years of history. I did refer to modern ideas earlier, and
here's my favorite caricature of them, that rock
band Devo in the 1980s. But, more seriously to make this very
simple, I'll just call attention to three kinds of characteristically
modern habits of thought. First, it is modern to think about mastery
of natural limits. That we can shape the environment to
fulfill our purposes rather than having to adapt to whatever the
natural environment gave us. It is a distinctively modern habit of
thought to actually think about ideas of equality and liberty in the way everybody
in the world now does today. A thousand years ago, these kinds of concepts
of equality and liberty just didn't really exist in any form that
we'd readily recognize today. Slavery was just taken for granted. It was taken for granted that people were naturally divided into hierarchies of
society. And now we've also pointed out that the
goals of equality and liberty can well be in
tension with each other. The resolution of that tension between is
one of the challenges of modern thinking. Another characteristic habit of thought
that's modern is this idea of creative
destruction. This idea pioneered by Joseph Schumpeter. By the way, a biography of Schumpeter by
Thomas McCraw is very much worth reading. This creative destruction. That creative destruction is a natural
process, not just in the Darwinian sense of the
slow gradual evolution of biological species,
but of manmade creations constantly creating
and recreating themselves, adapting, and the natural inherent stress of
creative destruction -- the constancy of change and the fertility
of change. That's a distinctively modern habit of
thought, that I think this course is illustrated in
a number of ways. So I think it's just about time for us now
to take stock of where we are in world history at this point in 2013, early
in the 21st century, looking back on the
whole canvas. And that's what we're going to do next
time, we'll try to position just where we are in an
unfolding narrative. See you then.