Protein-rich foods, including animal and plant-based proteins can also vary
enormously in their quality and their implications for
our long-term health. Proteins are often said to act as building
blocks for the lean tissues in our bodies. But they serve many other important
functions in body regulation, supportive immune function and a variety
of other roles in our physiology. There are 20 types of amino acids needed
to fulfill all of these functions, but only nine of them are essential. Meaning that our bodies can't
make enough of them, so we rely on getting these from our food. In general,
animal sources of protein like fish and eggs provide all of the essential
amino acids in high enough concentrations that these foods
are called complete protein sources. In contrast, plant based protein
sources like beans, lentils, nuts and tofu tend to be
incomplete sources of protein. It might seem that since plant-based
proteins are incomplete in their nutrient content that they're nutritionally inferior compared
with animal-based proteins. But in fact the health benefits of
substituting plant-based proteins for animal-based ones,
ideally a few days a week, this far outweighs the risk of falling
short on essential amino acids. Plant-based proteins can be combined
with other foods to provide a complete amino acid profile. In fact, many traditional food
combinations like corn and black beans or rice and lentils are based on the principal
of combining complementary proteins. Meals that contain vegetarian sources
of protein also contain more fiber and less fat, especially saturated fat, than
meals that feature animal based protein. And even though saturated fat may not
be as harmful as we once thought, it can still contribute to elevated levels of
LDL cholesterol if we eat too much of it. So moderating our intake of red meat,
for example, is still a sensible idea. In general, the typical western diet contains more animal based protein
than we need to sustain good health. >> People eat lots of plant food,
eat a plant based diet, tend to have much better health, and better longevity
than people who eat a heavy meat diet. >> So, if you're thinking of trying
a low card, high protein diet, it's important to pay attention to the
kinds of proteins that are being consumed, and in what quantities. A diet high in animal protein, especially
if it's poor quality animal protein, like processed meat or high fat cuts
of meat, this kind of diet can be harmful to our health even if it
leads to weight loss in a short term. Processed meats often contain
nitrates used as a preservative, which can damage blood vessels and
contribute to hardening of the arteries. These meats also tend to
be very high in sodium, which can be a contributor
to high blood pressure. The most sensible diets are usually
those that encourage us to eat moderate amounts of
high quality protein foods. These should come from
a variety of different sources, including some fish if possible. As well as plenty of vegetarian sources
of protein that are combined for completeness. [MUSIC]