[SOUND] For decades,
the relationship between dietary fats and health was at the center of
our attempts to understand the underlying cause of
the obesity epidemic. The debates over nutrition that you
will hear, should we worry about fat, should we worry about carbohydrates,
is the problem lack of fiber? All these are attempts to
understand what's the problem in the western diet that is the culprit. Because people like to figure that out
because then you can just adjust that one thing and go on your merry way, but
we haven't gotten that down yet. We don't know the answer to that
question with any real confidence. >> Despite the important roles
that fats play in our bodies, this entire category of food was
shunned for much of the 20th century. This led to an enormous increase in
the availability of fat free and reduced fat foods. But in spite of this,
obesity rates continue to rise. Today, rising awareness
about the difference between the so-called good fats and bad fats have allowed this important part
of our food supply to make a comeback. But once again, the pendulum threatens to
swing too far in the opposite direction. Dietary fats can be divided into
two families, the saturated and the unsaturated fats. Saturated fats get their name from the
fact that their fatty acids are saturated with hydrogen molecules. This means that they can lie flat and
pack together densely so that saturated fats tend to be
solids at room temperature. Animal fats, like lard and
butter, are good examples. In contrast, the fatty acids
that make up unsaturated fats are kinked in places where double
bonds between the carbon atoms cause the chains to be less
saturated with hydrogen. This also means that these fatty
acids don't pack together as tightly, leaving most unsaturated fats in
the liquid state at room temperature. Omega 3 fatty acids are a special
kind of unsaturated fatty acid, with double bonds in specific
positions of the hydrocarbon chain They're found in high
concentrations in fish oil, and also to some degree in nuts,
flax seeds, and other vegetable oils. Omega-3 fatty acids
are the only kind of fatty acid that the human body can't make,
so they're essential for our health and they need to be
consumed via the food we eat. Unsaturated fats can
be naturally occurring like the fats found in olive oil,
nuts and avocados. Or they can be man made or chemically
manipulated to become unsaturated. These are the fats found
in some margarines and in the kinds of oils that are often
used for repeated cooling and reheating in deep frying machines like the
ones used in many fast food restaurants. The problem with chemically
engineered unsaturated fats is that the chemical bonds between
the carbon atoms are less stable, so they easily flip into a trans orientation,
rather than a cis orientation. And this is where we get
the name trans fats. Trans fats are problematic for our health because they increase the
amount of LDL cholesterol in the blood and they lower the amount of HDL cholesterol,
the good cholesterol in the blood. By doing this trans fats promote to
formation of arterial plaques and increase the risk of heart disease. While saturated fats have also been
shown to contribute to increases in LDL cholesterol, they haven't been shown
to lower HDL cholesterol or to contribute to the development of arterial
plaques as significantly as trans fats. So, what's the bottom line when it
comes to foods that contain fat? Probably the most sensible
food recommendation is this. Enjoy reasonable amounts of foods that
contain mostly naturally occurring unsaturated fats like those found
in olive oil, nuts and avocados. Avoid all foods containing trans fats. And limit your intake of foods like red
meats that are high in saturated fats. [MUSIC]