[MUSIC] One of the biggest problems with
the typical Western diet is the fact that much of our food is refined,
or highly processed. The refining process removes
important nutrients like fiber, iron and B vitamins, and this is done
by food manufactures for two reasons. Firstly, it's to give the end
project a softer texture, and secondly it's done to extend the shelf
life of the resulting product. A heavily processed food is going to last longer on the supermarket shelf
because pests, like mold for example, are less attracted to
foods that are low in nutrients. A hamburger that's highly processed
will spoil much more slowly than a hamburger made at home
with mostly natural ingredients. But the question is, if highly
processed food is so low in nutrients that the pests don't even want to eat it,
how healthy can it be for us? In fact, the nutrient content of any given food is directly related
to the spoil rate of that food. Foods that are very low in
nutrients spoil much more slowly than foods that are rich in nutrients. >> One of the best
predictors of a healthy diet is whether it was cooked by a human
being or a large corporation. And the reason is that when we outsource
our food preparation to big companies, they tend to cook in a certain
way that isn't very healthy. They tend to use way too much salt, fat,
and sugar, all of which are problematic nutrients for our health, and they tend to
use the cheapest possible raw ingredients. Their business model is to
start with a cheap food and process it as much as possible, make
it attractive with salt, fat and sugar. >> Thinking about the nutrient density
of the food is another conceptual way of making sensible food decisions. The nutrient density of a food can be thought of as the amount of nutritional
value, including vitamins, minerals, and fiber, divided by the calories,
or energy content, of that food. For example,
a glass of soda is high in calories without providing much in
the way of nutritional value. Foods that provide lots of calories
with very little nutritional value are sometimes called energy dense foods,
but their nutrient density is low. A bunch of fresh spinach, on the other hand, would be an example
of a nutrient dense food because its nutritional value is relatively high
compared to its caloric content. When people talk about fast food
being cheaper than fresh food, they're often referring to
the fact that the cost per calorie of highly processed food is lower
than that of fresh, whole food. This is often true because
highly processed food is so high in calories that the cost
per calorie is relatively low. But, if we instead look at the cost
of food per unit of nutrient density, then buying fewer calories of
higher nutrient density food is a much better use of our food budget. In the midst of a serious
epidemic of obesity, avoiding empty calories should be near
the very top of our list of priorities. One of the reasons why highly processed
food is usually higher in calories is that in order to make these products
sell, significant amounts of fat, sugar, and salt are added to make
the nutrient-stripped foods taste good. Additives like colorants,
artificial flavors, stabilizers, and other preservatives, are also added
to enhance packaged products and maintain the illusion that we
as consumers have many choices when we walk through
the supermarket aisles. The last thing we need to be aware
of are highly processed foods that masquerade as healthy foods. These are products that have synthetic
nutrients added back to them after they've been refined, and this is
usually done to make the product seem healthy to the nutrition aware consumer. It's important to remember that the most
nutritious foods, like broccoli, don't come in packages that
tell us how healthy they are. [MUSIC]