Many people struggle to get started when they're told they need to
improve their eating habits. Here are some tips that can help you
achieve sustainable positive change. Firstly, it's important to take a stepwise
approach to making dietary changes. One or two small changes each week
will lead to more sustainable change, than trying to make many
drastic changes all at once. Identify target areas for
change like times of day that are particularly challenging for you, or
situations in which you tend to overeat. This can help you to define those stepwise
changes and to come with an action plan. For example,
in week 1 you might decide to replace all of the sweetened beverages in the
fridge with unsweetened sparkling water. You might even find creative ways to
remind yourself of this change by brushing and
flossing your teeth soon after dinner. Additional goals added in the second
week might include bringing a home made lunch to work instead of grabbing
a hot dog from the vendor down the street. And replacing the high calorie,
heavily processed snack foods in the home with fresh fruits and
crisp vegetables and maybe a healthy dip. Later on, you might choose to avoid
meat on one or two days of the week and instead eat plant-based proteins
like beans or lentils on those days. Behavioral changes alone can be
an important part of the step wise action plan. They can facilitate weight control even without consciously
changing the foods you eat. If you like the idea of focusing
on behavioral strategies, try signing a contract with yourself
stating that for the next month you will only eat when your seated at
a table using cutlery and a plate. This change alone,
increases the likely hood that the foods you eat will be well
thought out rather than impulse foods. A similar behavioral change is
the decision to cook at home twice, three times or
maybe even every night of the week. The chance of those foods being healthier
than what you ate before are pretty high. Sustainable dietary improvements
require a realistic targeted approach that focuses on progressive
improvements in your diet without the fear of failure that comes when you
try to achieve unrealistic dietary goals. Food is one of the greatest joys of life,
and optimizing your health means
identifying the foods and eating behaviors that will satisfy you
while protecting your long term health. [MUSIC]