One of the biggest pitfalls of the typical
Western Diet is the fact that it lacks the amount and variety of
plant based foods that human beings need to protect their long term health and
maintain a healthy weight. The average American consumes
less than two cups of fruits and vegetables everyday, less than half
of the recommended daily intake. So, for the majority of people
who wish to improve their diets, one of the most important
things they can do is to increase their daily consumption
of fresh fruits and vegetables. But, it's also important that
these foods are prepared in a way that supports our health and
that's where knowing how to cook tasty vegetable dishes can be such
a powerful skill to have. One of the best ways to start any cooked
vegetable dish, or any savory dish for that matter, is to chop and saute
onions in a small amount of olive oil. And if you like the flavor you can
add a little bit of garlic as well. >> Onions are the basis of so many dishes and in fact I think one
of the great impediments to cooking is people's dislike of chopping onion and
you just have to get over that. [LAUGH]
>> Sauteed onions are the first step to an amazing number of meals. Form this flavor rich starting point you
can add chopped veggies like zucchini or spinach with a bit of salt and pepper to make a delicious
veggie breakfast omelette. You can make a simple tomato sauce by
adding chopped or blended tomatoes and a touch of salt and
you can make a colorful vegetable stir fry with almost any vegetable
you happen to have in the fridge. Just chop it up and
flavor with some soy sauce or plum sauce or
any other sauce you happen to like. There are some safety
precautions involved like keeping your fingers away from
the blade of the knife and stabilizing vegetables by placing them
flat surface down while chopping. But in reality, the health risks associated with
vegetable chopping are probably far less serious than the health risks
associated with not eating them. >> And
you don't have to eat organic to eat well, it's the first decision is to
eat those fruits and vegetables. And if you can afford organic great, some organic foods taste better, they all
have less pesticide and that's important. But it's less important than the fact
that you're eating fruits and vegetables. Better to eat pesticide laden fruits and
vegetables than none at all. [MUSIC]