[MUSIC] Establishing a healthy diet that can
be maintained over time has to focus on sensible substitutions rather than simple
elimination of the foods we like to eat. This is one of the reasons
why skipping meals doesn't usually help to
maintain a healthy weight. Because our bodies will find ways to make
up for a perceived deprivation of food. Here is a simple exercise
to help you start thinking about healthy substitutions. Go through a typical day's food intake and identify times when you're habitually
eating less than desirable foods. For example,
the 48 year old man in our case study usually wound up snacking on potato
chips and candy in the evenings. What if that unhealthy snack food
were to be replaced with a healthy satisfying dip and
some fresh crisp veggies? Veggies and humus are a great
snack food substitution that can be found minimally processed
in most grocery stores. Or it can even be whipped up in minutes from some simple ingredients that
you can keep on hand in the kitchen. [SOUND] Even making your own
salad dressing instead of buying bottle salad dressing at the store,
this is a simple, healthful substitution that
can even save some money. A simple vinaigrette can be
thrown together in minutes and kept in an air-tight container
in the fridge for up to a week. Another sensible substitution,
if you're creating something crisp and slightly salty, is homemade popcorn, which
can be made in a pot or a popcorn maker. An added benefit, you get to control
the salt, and if you're using any oil at all you can control
the amount and type of oil that you use. In general, the homemade versions of
almost anything you crave will be healthier and probably tastier than
the processed version of those foods. Do you crave chicken nuggets? Make them from scratch using
organic chicken if you can. The homemade version only
requires six ingredients. Chicken, flour, egg, breadcrumbs,
olive oil and salt to taste. Compare that with the ingredients
in fast food chicken nuggets. If you feel like an occasional piece
of cake, make it from scratch. Using eggs, a reasonable amount of sugar,
butter, almond flour and baking powder. A slice of cake like this is almost
guaranteed to be more satisfying, and your dessert intake will be tempered
because you're making it yourself. >> You're not going to make dessert every
night if you're cooking it yourself because it's too much damn work. And so, there's something about
the act of cooking that enforces, without us even being conscious of it,
a healthy, wholesome diet. I think it's very hard to
get fat on home-cooked food. >> For every unhealthy food, there's
a healthy, home-cooked counterpart. And learning how to prepare these
substitutions is one of the keys to long-term weight management, and
an ongoing celebration of food. [MUSIC]