A healthy meal begins with
assembling a healthy plate and before you bring anything to that plate, it might be worthwhile to buy a set of
smaller dinner plates cups and glasses. Interestingly, many hardware stores
sell these very inexpensively, but they're harder to find
in fancy kitchen stores. Mostly because small plates
have gone out of style. >> One of the reasons we like
to obsess about nutrients and the industry likes to
obsess about nutrients, is the way of distracting us
from the quantities of food. And we are eating more. And the supersizing is
made plate sizes bigger. Soda sizes are bigger, and
the portions, from when I was a kid, have been doubled, and the bigger
the portion, the more you will eat. >> So,
size matters when it comes to your plate. But once you've found
a reasonably sized plate, the first step in constructing
the meal should be deciding, what is my vegetable component
of this meal going to be? We tend to start by thinking about
the protein when we're planning a meal. If we can think of
the vegetables as the feature then the entire meal will
likely end up being healthier. The plate itself should consist of
about one half plant based food, ideally with a mix of
different colored vegetables. Different colored vegetables
contain different micro nutrients. So, eating a variety of them
maximizes our nutrient coverage. In general, eating a variety of foods
is also beneficial because it minimizes the chances of getting sick from
potential contaminants in any one food. The remaining one half of the plate
Should be equally divided into whole grains and
lean protein rich foods. These foods can come from animal
sources or from plant sources, but again variety is good. Eating chicken every night of
the week is almost certainly not the best way to stay healthy or
excited about your next meal. Most of the time the best drink to
quench thirst and keep us hydrated and healthy is plain, clean water. The human body is made up
of more than 50% water so don't forget to replace
it during mealtime. Drinking water before each meal may
even be helpful for weight management. The variations are endless. But getting into the habit of creating
a healthy plate, sitting down for mealtimes, and
taking time to enjoy our meals. These are the pearls of wisdom our
great-grandmothers wore every day. [MUSIC]