[MUSIC] Hi, I'm Maya. Welcome to my kitchen. I have to tell you a story. A few years ago, we found out that one
of our children couldn't eat any gluten. That meant no more wheat, barley,
rye, or traditional oats. And we were always a family that
enjoyed cooking and eating together. And it was really a challenge for
us to find ways in which to recreate all of the things
that we'd previously eaten so that they could be shared with our little
guy who couldn't have gluten anymore. And one of the things that he loved
most were crepes on Sunday mornings. So we have to find a way
to make these crepes again. And through many false starts, and many
crepes that fell apart before they reached the plate, we came up with a recipe
that's not only better tasting I think, than the traditional crepes,
but actually more nutritious. And the children love it, and we all
get to have our Sunday morning crepes. So, I'm going to show you how to make
that today, and even if you're not gluten intolerant you might actually
choose to make these crepes for the nutritional value. So, because I make these so
frequently I like to mix up a batch of the crepe mix before hand and
just store it in my pantry. So that I have it ready. I have a box that says crepe mix on it, just so I don't get mixed
up with the other flours. And basically, what we're going to do is mix a few
different kinds of flour together. They are all gluten free flours, and
the nice thing about this is that it adds structure where the gluten in traditional
crepes kind of held them together. The mixing of these flours and the addition of a little bit of extra
egg actually solves that problem. So, this is teff flour. It comes from an Ethiopian
grain that is very small. It's the tiniest grain known to mankind. And because of that,
it has a very high iron content. And it's healthy. It's a very healthy kind of flour. They use it to make the Ethiopian
bread called injera. But it's lovely in crepes. This is sweet white sorghum flour. And we're going to add a bit of that. And then we're going to add a nice
gluten free white rice flour, just to balance it out. And finally, for a bit of protein and
a little bit of extra fiber and flavor, I'm going to add
ground hazelnuts to my mix. And then, the last thing we need to
add is something called xanthum gum. It's actually a natural product,
but what it does is it adds the elasticity that's missing when
you have gluten free anything. So most gluten free items will
contain a tiny bit of xanthum gum. So we're just going to add that on top,
and then we're going to do this. This is my favorite part. [MUSIC] We're just going to shake it up
until it's all nicely mixed. And every time you cook these crepes,
you're going to want to shake it again. I can already hear my little
guys coming to try some. We'll let them have
some in a little while. And what we're going to do now is
we're going to mix together all of our ingredients, and make some crepes so
that you can see how well they work. So I'm going to preheat a flat crepe pan. I'm just going to turn that on
kind of medium to medium low for it to get nice and warm. And this is the quick part. This is the part that you can do even
on a weekday morning if you feel like you have five extra minutes, and
you want to make something special for them other than cereal. I'm just going to crack
three eggs into a bowl. [MUSIC] Never be afraid to make
a mess in the kitchen. Okay, then I'm going to add some milk. [MUSIC] Some sugar. [MUSIC] And a bit of vanilla essence. So that's my wet mixture. What I'm going to do now
is just mix this up. Using a whisk,
I'm just whisking it together. Don't have to do this for
a long time, just for a few minutes. [SOUND] And then, we're going to
measure out about three-quarters of a cup of our gluten-free
crepe mix that we just made. But remember you're not going to
have to mix it every day. Once you've mixed a batch of it,
you can just use it as needed. So just about three-quarters of a cup. Doesn't matter if it's a little
bit more or a little bit less. And I'm going to try and keep that dry in the pantry until
the next time I use it, okay? So I am mixing up my crepe mix,
you might feel like it's a little bit runny at first, like this couldn't
possibly result in a crepe, but what you'll find is that
the crepes come up nicely. This is actually a great way to work
on your arm muscles at the same time. Okay, now I feel like this
might be a little bit, maybe, I might just add a little
bit more of my crepe mix. I'll show you what the texture's
going to be like at the end. I'm just going to add a little bit more so
that it's not too runny. And what we want, in the end of it, is something
the consistency of like a thick olive oil. So kind of like a very runny batter. [MUSIC] And then we're going to
make crepes out of it. So I'm going to take, I can already
hear the excitement in the background. I'm going to take a little bit
of butter and put it on the pan. And I'm just going to move
it around on the pan. Until it kind of coats
the bottom of the pan. [MUSIC] Okay, this is when the children
smell the butter melting and they start running down the stairs
because they want some. [MUSIC] And then when it's nice and warm. We're going to pour a little bit
of this batter onto the crepe pan. I'm just going to wait one more minute for
it to get nice and warm. [MUSIC] Okay, I'm hearing them
chanting mom's making crepes. I don't think you can hear that but I can. Very gratifying as a mother. And now I'm going to just shake
this pan all the way around until I get a nice thin crepe. So we want this to be as thin a possible. Because the thinner the crepe,
the better the experience for the kids. Okay, so we've got this now. Spread out in a nice, thin crepe. And we're going to wait for
the edges to get brown. And then we're going to flip it over and put a little bit of either Nutella or
jam or a tiny bit of syrup. It doesn't need to be very sweet. You don't have to add a lot of sugar,
just the taste of this homemade, warm crepe with a little bit of
butter in the pan is going to be very satisfying to your children. [MUSIC] So now, we see the edges of our crepes
starting to get a little bit brown. So what we're going to do is we're
going to just lift up the edges. You can use your spatula to release
the edges of the crepe all the way around. And then you're going to lift up one
side and just plop it on your spatula. And flip it over. And if it doesn't end up in the middle
of the pan, you can just move it over. It needs much less time on the second
side than on the first side. So you kind of start to see
bubbles rising in the crepe. And then you know that it's
cooked all the way through. Then you just need a plate. And I'm going to just take it like this
and slide it off ready for the next one. Now, this is my trick. I always start on the next one before
I feed the first one to a child. Otherwise, there can be war
over who got the first crepe. So, always get at least two or
three going, so you can feed them each one while
you're trying to make the next round. [MUSIC] So we're going to do
the same jiggling action. To try and get the crepe really thin and
really round. [MUSIC] Here we go. And we're going to let
the edges of that get brown and while we do that, we can dress this crepe. So, my children love Nutella. And so we're going to use just a little
bit, like about this much is enough. And we're going to flip this crepe over so they get the nice golden
brown side on the outside. And we're going to make a little
line of Nutella down the center. That's really all they need is just
a kind of a thin line of Nutella. Flip it in half. Roll it up. Cut and serve on a plate. Tastes really good. Okay, I'm going to get ready to flip
this crepe, and in the mean time, got a little serving plate and I'm just
going to stack these crepes on here, and then I'm going to, this one looks
like it's getting brown around edges. So I'm just going to lift
up the corner and flip it. Leave it on for just another 30 seconds or so, just until we see
the bubbles start to rise. So we know the crepe is cooked. And then, we can slide it off. There we go. So I'm just going to make up my second
crepe, so that nobody feels left out. And just a reminder,
you don't have to use Nutella, you can serve these with maple syrup or
jam. I've even made applesauce before and served that on the inside,
and the kids love it. They're much healthier than traditional
crepes because they have the teff flour and the ground hazelnuts in them,
and they're just as delicious. So, I hope your kids will
enjoy them as much as mine do. Thanks for joining me. [MUSIC]