[MUSIC] Hi, I'm Maya. Welcome to my kitchen. A few years ago, we decided to
plant a vegetable garden outside. We put in some zucchini's and
some fresh herbs. And a funny thing happened. Our children who are sometimes a little
bit picky about the vegetables, they got really excited about vegetables. One of the side effects was that
we had a lot of extra herbs. And so we had to come up with
a way to use all of these extra herbs because it just broke my heart
to see them go bad in the refrigerator. So we came up with a very simple chicken
recipe where you basically blend up any herbs you have in the garden,
rub them into your chicken, let it sit for a few hours, and bake. It's the easiest thing in the world. Let me show you how. Okay, so we're going to start by
basically, I have a small food processor here and we're going to start
by just cutting up herbs. I have a bunch of chives here, and
this is the easiest way to get them into the food processor,
we're just going to cut them up. It doesn't matter if
the pieces are large or small, because they're all going to
get kind of ground up together. And then I'm going to take
some fresh parsley, and I'm just going to use
the tops of this parsley. I'm not going to use the stems. And again, I'm just roughly chopping them. That's probably enough. And I'm going to put that into
my food processor as well. And then just to give it a little
bit of liquid, I might have to add this in two rounds, I'm going to
add a little bit of olive oil. I'm going to pour that in. Okay.
And then I'm going to add
a touch of fresh lemon juice. I just squeezed a bit of lemon. And just to balance off the flavors of
it I'm going to add a tiny bit of honey. I know it seems counterintuitive. That the honey is going to kind of
balance the sourness of the lemon. And then we're going to blend that up and see how it looks. [SOUND] Okay, so
now that we have a nice paste, we can add the rest of our parsley,
a little bit of fresh garlic. I just have two cloves of peeled garlic. It's going to add such a nice
flavor to the chicken. And a little bit of salt. Not too much, because it's for
the children. Just about a teaspoon of salt. Okay. And then we're going to
blend this all up again. And then add our last
herb which is the basil. [SOUND] See how easy this is? Okay, the last thing we're
going to add is the basil. This smells so good. I just picked it from the garden and
I'm going to basically pop these leaves in whole and
we are almost done with our marinade. [SOUND] Believe it or not, that is it. All we have to do now, remember to
remove your rings for this part. We have to just rub this lovely, fresh, fragrant mixture of
herbs into our chicken. [MUSIC] I'm just going to pour it on top. [MUSIC] The smell is so good. Okay. This is the part that it's going to
get messy there's nothing that you can do about that. Just enjoy it. Roll up your sleeves and go for it. So we're just going to rub this
marinade into our chicken. And I'm using some organic
chicken thighs and drumsticks. If your children like drumsticks you
can just use the drumsticks, but I'm using half and half. A few drumsticks and a few thighs. Okay. And now,
all we have to do is stack this chicken in kind of like an oven-proof dish. And you can let this marinate for a few
hours or overnight if you have the time. The flavors of those fresh herbs
just basically soak into the meat. [MUSIC] Okay, all I have to do is get
some saran wrap to cover this and we'll put it in the refrigerator for
a few hours. [MUSIC] Our chicken has been marinating
in the fridge for a few hours, it's ready now to put in the oven. I'm just going to take the saran wrap
off and put it in the oven, uncovered, at about 350 degrees until it
gets nice and brown on top. Once that's happened, I'm going to cover
it with some foil and put it back in, so that it can cook all the way through. It takes awhile,
about half an hour or so, but the best way to know if
your chicken is cooked, is to just cut into it with a knife and
see if it doesn't look pink inside and the juices are nice and clear, then
you've got some nicely cooked chicken. [MUSIC] Okay, our lemon herb chicken is all done. The whole house smells like
fresh herbs and garlic and fresh lemon and all we have to do
now is transfer it onto a plate. I have a few guests coming over tonight, so I'm not going to serve it out of
the same dish that I cooked it in. But even if you transfer it onto a plate
like this it's not a really complicated thing to do. [MUSIC] Okay we're just going to add some
yellow lemons for color to our plate. And we are ready for dinner. I would serve this with some
nice plain brown rice or some roasted potatoes and
a green salad something like that. I'm Maya, thanks for joining me and
hope to see you again soon. [MUSIC]