[MUSIC] Hello, everyone. I'm Maya. Welcome to my kitchen. Today I'd like to show you how
to make something called idlis. Idlis are a steamed, rice-based bun
that Indian children eat for breakfast. My children call them fluffy clouds for
short, and they're just delicious and chewy, and
I think your kids will like them, too. So the first thing you need is
something called an egg poacher. And it's a very simple contraption that
has a bottom section where you can put water in and then six little cups
that you could use to poach eggs. But I use them for idlis and
for many other steamed things. So I've put some water in the bottom
of this steamer already, and I'm just going to slide it
over onto a nice hot element. And we're going to let that boil while
we mix together our idli ingredients, and they're very simple ingredients. We've got some rice flour which
happens to be gluten free, this whole dish is gluten free. And then we're going to add
some desiccated coconut. You can use sweetened or unsweetened,
but if you do use sweetened coconut, you might want to reduce the amount
of sugar in your recipe. And then we're going to
add a little bit of sugar. I've used unsweetened desiccated coconut,
so I'm going to add about
a third of a cup of sugar. And then we need some raising agents,
so baking powder, and a little bit of baking soda. And then, so this is the best part. This is a spice called cardamom, and it's kind of like cinnamon, but
a little bit more exotic smelling. And it comes in these tiny little pods. So the first thing you have to do,
if you're using real cardamom like this, is you have to crack the pods open. And then just ease the little black seeds
out from the inside into your mortar and pestle. [MUSIC] And then you throw away the husk. [MUSIC] So I've used three little cardamom
pods for one batch of idlis. Depending on how big your cardamom pods
are, you might want to use three or four pods. If you're short of time, please feel free
to use the stuff that you buy ready ground like this from Whole Foods or from a
supermarket because this is just as good. This gives a slightly more
pungent flavor to your idlis. I'm just going to pound it up now. [NOISE] And once your cardamom
is finely ground like this, you can just add it to your mix. [NOISE] Then I'm going to mix up my dry ingredients. You don't even need a whisk to
do this breakfast and it's so, tastes so homemade and fresh. The last thing I'm going to add is
some just Russian style plain yogurt. So this is unsweetened yogurt and it adds
a little bit of a sour taste to the idlis. But it kind of balances the coconut and
the sweetness. And then I'm going to just lift
the yogurt into the dry mix. So I'm not going to
really whip it together. I'm just going to kind of incorporate
the wet mix into the dry mix until I have a thick paste. [MUSIC] My mom used to say you're supposed to
keep the air in, not whip the air out. I think there's some kind
of chemical reaction that happens between the acidity of
the yogurt and the raising agents, that actually causes this to
start to rise in your bowl. [MUSIC] And there we go. Now luckily,
my poacher is boiling already and I'm just going to use something to lift
up the lid so I don't burn myself. [MUSIC] And I'm going to put a tiny little
piece of butter at the bottom of each egg poaching dish. This is both for flavor and so
that the idlis don't stick. [MUSIC] Most of these egg poaching pans are kind
of, they have a non-stick lining anyway. So I guess it's mostly for flavor but
if you can add a tiny bit of butter for your children's breakfast, why not? Okay, now I'm going to scoop the idli
mixture into these little cups and I'll fill them about three
quarters of the way. [MUSIC] Just to be fair, a little bit more in that
one and then we're going to cover this up and just let it steam for about five to
seven minutes and we got fluffy clouds. What more could you ask for? That's it. [MUSIC] So our idlis have just finished steaming. Our first customer of the day is here,
this is Misha. He's the guy who coined
the term fluffy cloud, and I'm going to serve him one right now and
we'll see what he has to say. Okay, so we're going to use some tongs to
lift this little poaching cups up And then we're going to tip them out and we should
just wait until it cools down a bit. And see they just pop right out. And then what we're going to do, if you
can get your children to hold off for a minute,
we're just going to slice it in half. Just be careful because
it's a little bit hot. And it's,
we're going to cut it in half like this. We're going to put a little bit
of butter on both sides, and the butter melts right in there. They get so
excited just by the smell of this, it smells like coconut and
cardamom and all sorts of good things. Okay, wait wait, hold on one second Mish. And now I'm just going to take a tiny bit
of sugar and I'm just going to sort of nudge my spoon so that a little bit of the
sugar falls onto the top of the butter. Melted butter with a tiny
bit of sugar on top. [MUSIC] Okay, Mish. [MUSIC] [MUSIC] [NOISE] Get a child on camera and
this is what happened. Okay Mish, look this are for
your brothers and yours is going to be ready in
one minute when it cools down. >> One minute, one, two, three,
four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, [INAUDIBLE]
>> I think it's ready. You want to try it? >> [SOUND]
[MUSIC] >> So, those are idlis, very easy to make. You can serve them with some fresh fruit
and maybe a bit of scrambled eggs on the side or a sunny side up egg,
and you got a complete breakfast. I'm Maya.
Thanks for joining us. Hope to see you again soon. [MUSIC]