[MUSIC] Hi I'm Maya. Welcome to my kitchen. After two or three days of cereal for
breakfast, my children usually stage a protest and demand something better, but
I'm always short of time in the mornings. So I discovered an amazing way to
make pancakes in under ten minutes, using my blender. It's healthy, it's quick, and it's easy. Let me show you how. We're going to take a few eggs and
crack them right into the blender. [MUSIC] Without blending those,
we're going to add a bit of sugar. And you actually don't need much sugar for these pancakes, because the sweetness is
going to come from some overripe bananas. Sometimes I see these and
feel a bit guilty. I don't know what to do
with them at this stage. This is a good use for
your overripe bananas. So we're just going to peel these and
throw them in there. You can use any kind of overripe fruit,
by the way. If you have overripe pears,
cut them up and throw them in. They'll make a great tasting pancake. Okay, we're going to add a little
bit of vanilla essence, and now we're going to go for our first blend. [NOISE]
Okay, now we're going to add
a little bit of milk. And this is some nice, natural almond oil. If your children can eat nuts, this is a
very healthy oil to put in their pancakes. Pour that in, and we're going to give it one more blend
before we add our dry ingredients. [NOISE]
Okay, I have here some gluten-free baking mix. It's just a rice flour blend with
a little bit of a raising agent in it. If you're not gluten-free, use regular flour and add a teaspoon of
baking powder to make your pancakes rise. And we're going to add this slowly. So, we're not going to add it all at once, cause we don't want our pancake
batter to get too thick. [MUSIC] [SOUND] Okay, looks like I still need a bit more. [NOISE] And here we go for our last batch. Now I'm also going to add to
these pancakes some chia seeds. This is a nice way to add fiber to your
children's breakfast, super healthy, and doesn't taste really like
anything in the pancakes, so you might as well sneak a little
bit of fiber into their breakfast. [MUSIC] [NOISE]. Okay, so we've blended everything in this
one single blender, and now I'm going to pour it on the pan and you'll get to see
what the consistency should be like. So, we're going to take some nice,
unsalted butter and just grease our pan. If you're going to make pancakes for
breakfast use real butter. [NOISE] And then we're going to pour this
on and you'll see what it looks like. [MUSIC] Okay, now we're going to wait for
these guys to cook on one side. It always takes longer on the first side,
and what you're watching for is you're watching for
little bubbles to appear on the surface. That's how you know it's
time to flip your pancakes. Okay, so
I think my pancakes are ready to flip. [MUSIC] And so what I'm going to do now
is let them cook on this side a little bit shorter than the first side. Probably about 30 seconds to a minute
is all they need on the second side. There you have it,
blender pancakes in under 10 minutes. They're healthy for your kids because
they've got chia seeds in there for lots of extra fiber, and
you can use up your over ripe fruit. I'm Maya, thanks for joining me. Hope to see you again soon. [MUSIC]