[MUSIC] Hi, I'm Maya. Welcome to my kitchen. Today we're going to be
making egg salad sandwiches. My children love this sandwich, and
I let them have it probably once a week because eggs are a really
good source of Protein for children. That's a complete set of amino acids, but we don't want to give them too many
eggs or give them eggs every single day. So I let them have this once a week. This is very easy and I started by
hard boiling a few eggs last night. I just put them in a pot with
water at room temperature and then allowed that pot to come to a boil. Once it's boiling, you want to let
them boil for about 12 minutes and then put them in the fridge to cool. And the next day you can just gently
crack the shells and peel the shells off. That's what they look
like aren't they pretty? Okay so now what we're going to do is
we're going to mash these eggs up and there's no right way to do this. You just take a fork again another
high tech device in my kitchen. And you're just going to
break the eggs apart and sort of mash them into smallish chunks. We wanted to show you how to do this
because it's not so attractive to look at the end product until it's
mixed up in the egg salad sandwich. So this is what a mashed egg looks like. Yup. Okay, so we're going to do that with,
whoops slippery little suckers. We're going to do that
with all of our eggs. Just going to mash each one of them up. [MUSIC] Okay so I've now mashed up all of my hard
boiled eggs and now comes the easy part. I'm just going to add some mayonnaise. [MUSIC] And then I've chopped up some
fresh chives and some shallots. Apparently there are different ways to say
that word, but I'm originally Canadian, so we say shallots. So these are my chives. Chives are these long green things. They look beautiful and green like this. And I've basically chopped them up and
chopped up some shallots. This is what they look
like before you chop them. And some small gherkins or pickles. And we're going to just basically
push all of this stuff, I'm going to save a few chives for
the garnish, but I'm going to push everything else
into my bowl with my egg salad. [MUSIC] There we go. And then, so I'm going to add
a little bit of pepper and some salt. As much as you like, or
as little as you like. Probably better for us, and then we're
going to just mix this all together. [MUSIC] Mm, thee smells of those
fresh shallots and the chopped gherkins are just,
just makes my mouth water. Okay, so we've got that all mixed up,
how easy was that? This is one of the quickest lunches
you can make for your children. It's great in a lunch box, because you
can put it between two slices of bread, and put it with a little
cooling pack in the lunch, and it makes them very happy at lunchtime. Now, we're going to put
some of this on some fresh homemade bread that I made this morning. You don't have to bake
your own bread to do this. But I do because we have a child
who can't have any gluten so I bake this bread fresh for him. And what I do is I just
cut my bread in half. And this is kind of how I would serve, for
example, if I was having people over for lunch or brunch or tea and I would just
put a little scoop on this slice of bread and then take a few fresh green chives and
just sprinkle them on top. Isn't that pretty? Okay, I'm going to make
a bunch of these for lunch. I I hope you try and make them yourself,
I think you'll really like them. I'm Maya, thanks for joining me. [MUSIC]